<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0001">ROUND THE MOON: by JULES VERNE,</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0002">PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0003">RECAPITULATING THE FIRST PART OF THIS WORK, AND       SERVING AS A PREFACE TO THE SECOND.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0004">During the year 186—, the whole world was greatly excited by a scientific experiment unprecedented in the annals of science. </span>
      <span id="f0005">The members of the Gun Club, a circle of artillerymen formed at Baltimore after the American war, conceived the idea of putting themselves in communication with the moon!—yes, with the moon,—by sending to her a projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0006">Their president, Barbicane, the promoter of the enterprise, having consulted the astronomers of the Cambridge Observatory upon the subject, took all necessary means to ensure the success of this extraordinary enterprise, which had been declared practicable by the majority of competent judges. </span>
      <span id="f0007">After setting on foot a public subscription, which realized nearly 1,200,000_l._ they began the gigantic work.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0008">According to the advice forwarded from the members of the Observatory, the gun destined to launch the projectile had to be fixed in a country situated between the 0 and 28th degrees of north or south latitude, in order to aim at the moon when at the zenith; and its initiatory velocity was fixed at twelve thousand yards to the second. </span>
      <span id="f0009">Launched on the 1st of December, at 10hrs. </span>
      <span id="f0010">46m. </span>
      <span id="f0011">40s. </span>
      <span id="f0012">p.m., it ought to reach the moon four days after its departure, that is on the 5th of December, at midnight precisely, at the moment of her attaining her _perigee_, that is her nearest distance from the earth, which is exactly 86,410 leagues (French), or 238,833 miles _mean distance_ (English).</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0013">The principal members of the Gun Club, President Barbicane, Major Elphinstone, the secretary Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0014">Maston, and other learned men, held several meetings, at which the shape and composition of the projectile were discussed, also the position and nature of the gun, and the quality and quantity of the powder to be used. </span>
      <span id="f0015">It was decided: 1st, that the projectile should be a shell made of aluminium with a diameter of 108 inches and a thickness of twelve inches to its walls; and should weigh 19,250 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f0016">2ndly, that the gun should be a Columbiad cast in iron, 900 feet long, and run perpendicularly into the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0017">3rdly, that the charge should contain 400,000 pounds of gun-cotton, which, giving out six billions of litres of gas in rear of the projectile, would easily carry it towards the orb of night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0018">These questions determined President Barbicane, assisted by Murchison the engineer, to choose a spot situated in Florida, in 27° 7&#39; North latitude, and 77° 3&#39; West (Greenwich) longitude. </span>
      <span id="f0019">It was on this spot, after stupendous labour, that the Columbiad was cast with full success. </span>
      <span id="f0020">Things stood thus, when an incident took place which increased the interest attached to this great enterprise a hundredfold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0021">A Frenchman, an enthusiastic Parisian, as witty as he was bold, asked to be enclosed in the projectile, in order that he might reach the moon, and reconnoitre this terrestrial satellite. </span>
      <span id="f0022">The name of this intrepid adventurer was Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0023">He landed in America, was received with enthusiasm, held meetings, saw himself carried in triumph, reconciled President Barbicane to his mortal enemy, Captain Nicholl, and, as a token of reconciliation, persuaded them both to start with him in the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0024">The proposition being accepted, the shape of the projectile was slightly altered. </span>
      <span id="f0025">It was made of a cylindro-conical form. </span>
      <span id="f0026">This species of aerial car was lined with strong springs and partitions to deaden the shock of departure. </span>
      <span id="f0027">It was provided with food for a year, water for some months, and gas for some days. </span>
      <span id="f0028">A self-acting apparatus supplied the three travellers with air to breathe. </span>
      <span id="f0029">At the same time, on one of the highest points of the Rocky Mountains, the Gun Club had a gigantic telescope erected, in order that they might be able to follow the course of the projectile through space. </span>
      <span id="f0030">All was then ready.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0031">On the 30th November, at the hour fixed upon, from the midst of an extraordinary crowd of spectators, the departure took place; and for the first time, three human beings quitted the terrestrial globe, and launched into interplanetary space with almost a certainty of reaching their destination. </span>
      <span id="f0032">These bold travellers, Michel Ardan, President Barbicane, and Captain Nicholl, ought to make the passage in ninety-seven hours, thirteen minutes, and twenty seconds. </span>
      <span id="f0033">Consequently, their arrival on the lunar disc could not take place until the 5th December at twelve at night, at the exact moment when the moon should be full, and not on the 4th, as some badly-informed journals had announced.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0034">But an unforeseen circumstance, viz., the detonation produced by the Columbiad, had the immediate effect of troubling the terrestrial atmosphere, by accumulating a large quantity of vapour, a phenomenon which excited universal indignation, for the moon was hidden from the eyes of the watchers for several nights.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0035">The worthy Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0036">Maston, the staunchest friend of the three travellers, started for the Rocky Mountains, accompanied by the Hon. </span>
      <span id="f0037">J. </span>
      <span id="f0038">Belfast, director of the Cambridge Observatory, and reached the station of Long&#39;s Peak, where the telescope was erected which brought the moon within an apparent distance of two leagues. </span>
      <span id="f0039">The honorable secretary of the Gun Club wished himself to observe the vehicle of his daring friends.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0040">The accumulation of clouds in the atmosphere prevented all observations on the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th of December. </span>
      <span id="f0041">Indeed it was thought that all observations would have to be put off to the 3rd of January in the following year; for the moon entering its last quarter on the 11th, would then only present an ever-decreasing portion of her disc, insufficient to allow of their following the course of the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0042">At length, to the general satisfaction, a heavy storm cleared the atmosphere on the night of the 11th and 12th December, and the moon, with half illuminated disc, was plainly to be seen upon the black sky.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0043">That very night a telegram was sent from the station of Long&#39;s Peak by Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0044">Maston and Belfast to the gentlemen of the Cambridge Observatory, announcing that on the 11th of December at 8h. </span>
      <span id="f0045">47m. </span>
      <span id="f0046">p.m., the projectile launched by the Columbiad of Stones Hill had been detected by Messrs. </span>
      <span id="f0047">Belfast and Maston,—that it had deviated from its course from some unknown cause, and had not reached its destination; but that it had passed near enough to be retained by the lunar attraction; that its rectilinear movement had been changed to a circular one, and that following an elliptical orbit round the star of night it had become its _satellite._ The telegram added that the elements of this new star had not yet been calculated; and indeed three observations made upon a star in three different positions are necessary to determine these elements. </span>
      <span id="f0048">Then it showed that the distance separating the projectile from the lunar surface &#34;might&#34; be reckoned at about 2833 miles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0049">It ended with this double hypothesis; either the attraction of the moon would draw it to herself, and the travellers thus attain their end; or that the projectile, held in one immutable orbit, would gravitate around the lunar disc to all eternity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0050">With such alternatives, what would be the fate of the travellers? </span>
      <span id="f0051">Certainly they had food for some time. </span>
      <span id="f0052">But supposing they did succeed in their rash enterprise, how would they return? </span>
      <span id="f0053">Could they ever return? </span>
      <span id="f0054">Should they hear from them? </span>
      <span id="f0055">These questions, debated by the most learned pens of the day, strongly engrossed the public attention.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0056">It is advisable here to make a remark which ought to be well considered by hasty observers. </span>
      <span id="f0057">When a purely speculative discovery is announced to the public, it cannot be done with too much prudence. </span>
      <span id="f0058">No one is obliged to discover either a planet, a comet, or a satellite; and whoever makes a mistake in such a case exposes himself justly to the derision of the mass. </span>
      <span id="f0059">Far better is it to wait; and that is what the impatient Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0060">Maston should have done before sending this telegram forth to the world, which, according to his idea, told the whole result of the enterprise. </span>
      <span id="f0061">Indeed this telegram contained two sorts of errors, as was proved eventually. </span>
      <span id="f0062">1st, errors of observation, concerning the distance of the projectile from the surface of the moon, for on the 11th December it was impossible to see it; and what Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0063">Maston had seen, or thought he saw, could not have been the projectile of the Columbiad. </span>
      <span id="f0064">2ndly, errors of theory on the fate in store for the said projectile; for in making it a satellite of the moon, it was putting it in direct contradiction to all mechanical laws.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0065">One single hypothesis of the observers of Long&#39;s Peak could ever be realized, that which foresaw the case of the travellers (if still alive) uniting their efforts with the lunar attraction to attain the surface of the disc.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0066">Now these men, as clever as they were daring, _had_ survived the terrible shock consequent on their departure, and it is their journey in the projectile car which is here related in its most dramatic as well as in its most singular details. </span>
      <span id="f0067">This recital will destroy many illusions and surmises; but it will give a true idea of the singular changes in store for such an enterprise; it will bring out the scientific instincts of Barbicane, the industrious resources of Nicholl, and the audacious humour of Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0068">Besides this, it will prove that their worthy friend, Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0069">Maston, was wasting his time, while leaning over the gigantic telescope he watched the course of the moon through the starry space.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>