<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0070">CHAPTER I.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0071">FROM TWENTY MINUTES PAST TEN TO FORTY-SEVEN MINUTES       PAST TEN P.M.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0072">As ten o&#39;clock struck, Michel Ardan, Barbicane, and Nicholl, took leave of the numerous friends they were leaving on the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0073">The two dogs, destined to propagate the canine race on the lunar continents, were already shut up in the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0074">The three travellers approached the orifice of the enormous cast-iron tube, and a crane let them down to the conical top of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0075">There, an opening made for the purpose gave them access to the aluminium car. </span>
      <span id="f0076">The tackle belonging to the crane being hauled from outside, the mouth of the Columbiad was instantly disencumbered of its last supports.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0077">Nicholl, once introduced with his companions inside the projectile, began to close the opening by means of a strong plate, held in position by powerful screws. </span>
      <span id="f0078">Other plates, closely fitted, covered the lenticular glasses, and the travellers, hermetically enclosed in their metal prison, were plunged in profound darkness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0079">&#34;And now, my dear companions,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;let us make ourselves at home; I am a domesticated man and strong in housekeeping. </span>
      <span id="f0080">We are bound to make the best of our new lodgings, and make ourselves comfortable. </span>
      <span id="f0081">And first let us try and see a little. </span>
      <span id="f0082">Gas was not invented for moles.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0083">So saying, the thoughtless fellow lit a match by striking it on the sole of his boot; and approached the burner fixed to the receptacle, in which the carbonized hydrogen, stored at high pressure, sufficed for the lighting and warming of the projectile for a hundred and forty-four hours, or six days and six nights. </span>
      <span id="f0084">The gas caught fire, and thus lighted the projectile looked like a comfortable room with thickly padded walls, furnished with a circular divan, and a roof rounded in the shape of a dome.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0085">The objects it contained, arms, instruments, and utensils securely fastened against the rounds of wadding, could bear the shock of departure with impunity. </span>
      <span id="f0086">Humanly speaking, every possible precaution had been taken to bring this rash experiment to a successful termination.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0087">Michel Ardan examined everything, and declared himself satisfied with his installation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0088">&#34;It is a prison,&#34; said he, &#34;but a travelling prison; and, with the right of putting my nose to the window, I could well stand a lease of a hundred years. </span>
      <span id="f0089">You smile, Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0090">Have you any _arrière-pensée?_ Do you say to yourself, &#39;This prison may be our tomb?&#39; Tomb, perhaps; still I would not change it for Mahomet&#39;s, which floats in space but never advances an inch!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0091">Whilst Michel Ardan was speaking, Barbicane and Nicholl were making their last preparations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0092">Nicholl&#39;s chronometer marked twenty minutes past ten p.m. </span>
      <span id="f0093">when the three travellers were finally enclosed in their projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0094">This chronometer was set within the tenth of a second by that of Murchison the engineer. </span>
      <span id="f0095">Barbicane consulted it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0096">&#34;My friends,&#34; said he, &#34;it is twenty minutes past ten. </span>
      <span id="f0097">At forty-seven minutes past ten Murchison will launch the electric spark on the wire which communicates with the charge of the Columbiad. </span>
      <span id="f0098">At that precise moment we shall leave our spheroid. </span>
      <span id="f0099">Thus we have still twenty-seven minutes to remain on the earth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0100">&#34;Twenty-six minutes thirteen seconds,&#34; replied the methodical Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0101">&#34;Well!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, in a good-humoured tone, &#34;much may be done in twenty-six minutes. </span>
      <span id="f0102">The gravest questions of morals and politics may be discussed, and even solved. </span>
      <span id="f0103">Twenty-six minutes well employed are worth more than twenty-six years in which nothing is done. </span>
      <span id="f0104">Some _seconds_ of a Pascal or a Newton are more precious than the whole existence of a crowd of raw simpletons—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0105">&#34;And you conclude, then, you everlasting talker?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0106">&#34;I conclude that we have twenty-six minutes left,&#34; replied Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0107">&#34;Twenty-four only,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0108">&#34;Well, twenty-four, if you like, my noble captain,&#34; said Ardan; &#34;twenty-four minutes in which to investigate—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0109">&#34;Michel,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;during the passage we shall have plenty of time to investigate the most difficult questions. </span>
      <span id="f0110">For the present we must occupy ourselves with our departure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0111">&#34;Are we not ready?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0112">&#34;Doubtless; but there are still some precautions to be taken, to deaden as much as possible the first shock.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0113">&#34;Have we not the water-cushions placed between the partition-breaks, whose elasticity will sufficiently protect us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0114">&#34;I hope so, Michel,&#34; replied Barbicane gently, &#34;but I am not sure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0115">&#34;Ah, the joker!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0116">&#34;He hopes!—He is not sure!—and he waits for the moment when we are encased to make this deplorable admission! </span>
      <span id="f0117">I beg to be allowed to get out!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0118">&#34;And how?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0119">&#34;Humph!&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;it is not easy; we are in the train, and the guard&#39;s whistle will sound before twenty-four minutes are over.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0120">&#34;_Twenty_,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0121">For some moments the three travellers looked at each other. </span>
      <span id="f0122">Then they began to examine the objects imprisoned with them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0123">&#34;Everything is in its place,&#34; said Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0124">&#34;We have now to decide how we can best place ourselves to resist the shock. </span>
      <span id="f0125">Position cannot be an indifferent matter; and we must, as much as possible, prevent the rush of blood to the head.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0126">&#34;Just so,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0127">&#34;Then,&#34; replied Michel Ardan, ready to suit the action to the word, &#34;let us put our heads down and our feet in the air, like the clowns in the grand circus.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0128">&#34;No,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;let us stretch ourselves on our sides; we shall resist the shock better that way. </span>
      <span id="f0129">Remember that, when the projectile starts, it matters little whether we are in it or before it; it amounts to much the same thing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0130">&#34;If it is only &#39;much the same thing,&#39; I may cheer up,&#34; said Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0131">&#34;Do you approve of my idea, Nicholl?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0132">&#34;Entirely,&#34; replied the captain. </span>
      <span id="f0133">&#34;We&#39;ve still thirteen minutes and a half.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0134">&#34;That Nicholl is not a man,&#34; exclaimed Michel; &#34;he is a chronometer with seconds, an escape, and eight holes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0135">But his companions were not listening; they were taking up their last positions with the most perfect coolness. </span>
      <span id="f0136">They were like two methodical travellers in a car, seeking to place themselves as comfortably as possible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0137">We might well ask ourselves of what materials are the hearts of these Americans made, to whom the approach of the most frightful danger added no pulsation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0138">Three thick and solidly-made couches had been placed in the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0139">Nicholl and Barbicane placed them in the centre of the disc forming the floor. </span>
      <span id="f0140">There the three travellers were to stretch themselves some moments before their departure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0141">During this time, Ardan, not being able to keep still, turned in his narrow prison like a wild beast in a cage, chatting with his friends, speaking to the dogs Diana and Satellite, to whom, as may be seen, he had given significant names.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0142">&#34;Ah, Diana! </span>
      <span id="f0143">Ah, Satellite!&#34; he exclaimed, teazing them; &#34;so you are going to show the moon-dogs the good habits of the dogs of the earth! </span>
      <span id="f0144">That will do honour to the canine race! </span>
      <span id="f0145">If ever we do come down again, I will bring a cross type of &#39;moon-dogs,&#39; which will make a stir!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0146">&#34;If there _are_ dogs in the moon,&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0147">&#34;There are,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;just as there are horses, cows, donkeys, and chickens. </span>
      <span id="f0148">I bet that we shall find chickens.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0149">&#34;A hundred dollars we shall find none!&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0150">&#34;Done, my captain!&#34; replied Ardan, clasping Nicholl&#39;s hand. </span>
      <span id="f0151">&#34;But, by the bye, you have already lost three bets with our president, as the necessary funds for the enterprise have been found, as the operation of casting has been successful, and lastly, as the Columbiad has been loaded without accident, six thousand dollars.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0152">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f0153">&#34;Thirty-seven minutes six seconds past ten.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0154">&#34;It is understood, captain. </span>
      <span id="f0155">Well, before another quarter of an hour you will have to count 9000 dollars to the president; 4000 because the Columbiad will not burst, and 5000 because the projectile will rise more than six miles in the air.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0156">&#34;I have the dollars,&#34; replied Nicholl, slapping the pocket of his coat. </span>
      <span id="f0157">&#34;I only ask to be allowed to pay.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0158">&#34;Come, Nicholl, I see that you are a man of method, which I could never be; but indeed you have made a series of bets of very little advantage to yourself, allow me to tell you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0159">&#34;And why?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0160">&#34;Because, if you gain the first, the Columbiad will have burst, and the projectile with it; and Barbicane will no longer be there to reimburse your dollars.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0161">&#34;My stake is deposited at the bank in Baltimore,&#34; replied Barbicane simply; &#34;and if Nicholl is not there, it will go to his heirs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0162">&#34;Ah, you practical men!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan; &#34;I admire you the more for not being able to understand you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0163">&#34;Forty-two minutes past ten!&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0164">&#34;Only five minutes more!&#34; answered Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0165">&#34;Yes, five little minutes!&#34; replied Michel Ardan; &#34;and we are enclosed in a projectile, at the bottom of a gun 900 feet long! </span>
      <span id="f0166">And under this projectile are rammed 400,000 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f0167">of gun-cotton, which is equal to 1,600,000 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f0168">of ordinary powder! </span>
      <span id="f0169">And friend Murchison, with his chronometer in hand, his eye fixed on the needle, his finger on the electric apparatus, is counting the seconds preparatory to launching us into interplanetary space.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0170">&#34;Enough, Michel, enough!&#34; said Barbicane, in a serious voice; &#34;let us prepare. </span>
      <span id="f0171">A few instants alone separate us from an eventful moment. </span>
      <span id="f0172">One clasp of the hand, my friends.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0173">&#34;Yes,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, more moved than he wished to appear; and the three bold companions were united in a last embrace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0174">&#34;God preserve us!&#34; said the religious Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">Michel Ardan and Nicholl stretched themselves on the couches placed in the centre of the disc.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0176">&#34;Forty seven minutes past ten!&#34; murmured the captain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0177">&#34;Twenty seconds more!&#34; Barbicane quickly put out the gas and lay down by his companions, and the profound silence was only broken by the ticking of the chronometer marking the seconds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0178">Suddenly a dreadful shock was felt, and the projectile, under the force of six billions of litres of gas, developed by the combustion of the pyroxyle, mounted into space.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>