<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1429">CHAPTER X.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1430">THE OBSERVERS OF THE MOON.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1431">Barbicane had evidently hit upon the only plausible reason of this deviation. </span>
      <span id="f1432">However slight it might have been, it had sufficed to modify the course of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1433">It was a fatality. </span>
      <span id="f1434">The bold attempt had miscarried by a fortuitous circumstance; and unless by some exceptional event, they could now never reach the moon&#39;s disc.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1435">Would they pass near enough to be able to solve certain physical and geological questions until then insoluble? </span>
      <span id="f1436">This was the question, and the only one, which occupied the minds of these bold travellers. </span>
      <span id="f1437">As to the fate in store for themselves, they did not even dream of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1438">But what would become of them amid these infinite solitudes, these who would soon want air? </span>
      <span id="f1439">A few more days, and they would fall stifled in this wandering projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1440">But some days to these intrepid fellows was a century; and they devoted all their time to observe that moon which they no longer hoped to reach.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1441">The distance which then separated the projectile from the satellite was estimated at about 200 leagues. </span>
      <span id="f1442">Under these conditions, as regards the visibility of the details of the disc, the travellers were farther from the moon than are the inhabitants of the earth with their powerful telescopes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1443">Indeed, we know that the instrument mounted by Lord Rosse at Parsonstown, which magnifies 6500 times, brings the moon to within an apparent distance of sixteen leagues. </span>
      <span id="f1444">And more than that, with the powerful one set up at Long&#39;s Peak, the orb of night, magnified 48,000 times, is brought to within less than two leagues, and objects having a diameter of thirty feet are seen very distinctly. </span>
      <span id="f1445">So that, at this distance, the topographical details of the moon, observed without glasses, could not be determined with precision. </span>
      <span id="f1446">The eye caught the vast outline of those immense depressions inappropriately called &#34;seas,&#34; but they could not recognize their nature. </span>
      <span id="f1447">The prominence of the mountains disappeared under the splendid irradiation produced by the reflection of the solar rays. </span>
      <span id="f1448">The eye, dazzled as if it was leaning over a bath of molten silver, turned from it involuntarily; but the oblong form of the orb was quite clear. </span>
      <span id="f1449">It appeared like a gigantic egg, with the small end turned towards the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1450">Indeed the moon, liquid and pliable in the first days of its formation, was originally a perfect sphere; but being soon drawn within the attraction of the earth, it became elongated under the influence of gravitation. </span>
      <span id="f1451">In becoming a satellite, she lost her native purity of form; her centre of gravity was in advance of the centre of her figure; and from this fact some savants draw the conclusion that the air and water had taken refuge on the opposite surface of the moon, which is never seen from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1452">This alteration in the primitive form of the satellite was only perceptible for a few moments. </span>
      <span id="f1453">The distance of the projectile from the moon diminished very rapidly under its speed, though that was much less than its initial velocity,—but eight or nine times greater than that which propels our express trains. </span>
      <span id="f1454">The oblique course of the projectile, from its very obliquity, gave Michel Ardan some hopes of striking the lunar disc at some point or other. </span>
      <span id="f1455">He could not think that they would never reach it. </span>
      <span id="f1456">No! </span>
      <span id="f1457">he could not believe it; and this opinion he often repeated. </span>
      <span id="f1458">But Barbicane, who was a better judge, always answered him with merciless logic.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1459">&#34;No, Michel, no! </span>
      <span id="f1460">We can only reach the moon by a fall, and we are not falling. </span>
      <span id="f1461">The centripetal force keeps us under the moon&#39;s influence, but the centrifugal force draws us irresistibly away from it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1462">This was said in a tone which quenched Michel Ardan&#39;s last hope.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1463">The portion of the moon which the projectile was nearing was the northern hemisphere, that which the Selenographic maps place below; for these maps are generally drawn after the outline given by the glasses, and we know that they reverse the objects. </span>
      <span id="f1464">Such was the _Mappa Selenographica_ of Bœer and Moedler which Barbicane consulted. </span>
      <span id="f1465">This northern hemisphere presented vast plains, dotted with isolated mountains.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1466">At midnight the moon was full. </span>
      <span id="f1467">At that precise moment the travellers should have alighted upon it, if the mischievous meteor had not diverted their course. </span>
      <span id="f1468">The orb was exactly in the condition determined by the Cambridge Observatory. </span>
      <span id="f1469">It was mathematically at its perigee, and at the zenith of the twenty-eighth parallel. </span>
      <span id="f1470">An observer placed at the bottom of the enormous Columbiad, pointed perpendicularly to the horizon, would have framed the moon in the mouth of the gun. </span>
      <span id="f1471">A straight line drawn through the axis of the piece would have passed through the centre of the orb of night. </span>
      <span id="f1472">It is needless to say, that during the night of the 5th—6th of December, the travellers took not an instant&#39;s rest. </span>
      <span id="f1473">Could they close their eyes when so near this new world? </span>
      <span id="f1474">No! </span>
      <span id="f1475">All their feelings were concentrated in one single thought:—See! </span>
      <span id="f1476">Representatives of the earth, of humanity, past and present, all centred in them! </span>
      <span id="f1477">It is through their eyes that the human race look at these lunar regions, and penetrate the secrets of their satellite! </span>
      <span id="f1478">A strange emotion filled their hearts as they went from one window to the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1479">Their observations, reproduced by Barbicane, were rigidly determined. </span>
      <span id="f1480">To take them, they had glasses; to correct them, maps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1481">As regards the optical instruments at their disposal, they had excellent marine glasses specially constructed for this journey.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1482">They possessed magnifying powers of 100. </span>
      <span id="f1483">They would thus have brought the moon to within a distance (apparent) of less than 2000 leagues from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1484">But then, at a distance which for three hours in the morning did not exceed sixty-five miles, and in a medium free from all atmospheric disturbances, these instruments could reduce the lunar surface to within less than 1500 yards!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>