<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1532">CHAPTER XII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1533">OROGRAPHIC DETAILS.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1534">The course taken by the projectile, as we have before remarked, was bearing it towards the moon&#39;s northern hemisphere. </span>
      <span id="f1535">The travellers were far from the central point which they would have struck, had their course not been subject to an irremediable deviation. </span>
      <span id="f1536">It was past midnight; and Barbicane then estimated the distance at 750 miles, which was a little greater than the length of the lunar radius, and which would diminish as it advanced nearer to the North Pole. </span>
      <span id="f1537">The projectile was then not at the altitude of the equator; but across the tenth parallel, and from that latitude, carefully taken on the map to the pole, Barbicane and his two companions were able to observe the moon under the most favourable conditions. </span>
      <span id="f1538">Indeed, by means of glasses, the above named distance was reduced to little more than fourteen miles. </span>
      <span id="f1539">The telescope of the Rocky Mountains brought the moon much nearer; but the terrestrial atmosphere singularly lessened its power. </span>
      <span id="f1540">Thus Barbicane, posted in his projectile, with the glasses to his eyes, could seize upon details which were almost imperceptible to earthly observers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1541">&#34;My friends,&#34; said the president, in a serious voice, &#34;I do not know whither we are going; I do not know if we shall ever see the terrestrial globe again. </span>
      <span id="f1542">Nevertheless, let us proceed as if our work would one day be useful to our fellow-men. </span>
      <span id="f1543">Let us keep our minds free from every other consideration. </span>
      <span id="f1544">We are astronomers; and this projectile is a room in the Cambridge University, carried into space. </span>
      <span id="f1545">Let us make our observations!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1546">This said, work was begun with great exactness; and they faithfully reproduced the different aspects of the moon, at the different distances which the projectile reached.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1547">At the time that the projectile was as high as the tenth parallel, north latitude, it seemed rigidly to follow the twentieth degree, east longitude. </span>
      <span id="f1548">We must here make one important remark with regard to the map by which they were taking observations. </span>
      <span id="f1549">In the selenographical maps where, on account of the reversing of the objects by the glasses, the south is above and the north below, it would seem natural that, on account of that inversion, the east should be to the left hand, and the west to the right. </span>
      <span id="f1550">But it is not so. </span>
      <span id="f1551">If the map were turned upside down, showing the moon as we see her, the east would be to the _left_, and the west to the _right_, contrary to that which exists on terrestrial maps. </span>
      <span id="f1552">The following is the reason of this anomaly. </span>
      <span id="f1553">Observers in the northern hemisphere (say in Europe) see the moon in the south,— according to them. </span>
      <span id="f1554">When they take observations, they turn their backs to the north, the reverse position to that which they occupy when they study a terrestrial map. </span>
      <span id="f1555">As they turn their backs to the north, the east is on their left, and the west to their right. </span>
      <span id="f1556">To observers in the southern hemisphere (Patagonia for example), the moon&#39;s west would be quite to their left, and the east to their right, as the south is behind them. </span>
      <span id="f1557">Such is the reason of the apparent reversing of these two cardinal points, and we must bear it in mind in order to be able to follow President Barbicane&#39;s observations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1558">With the help of Bœer and Moedler&#39;s _Mappa Selenographica_, the travellers were able at once to recognise that portion of the disc enclosed within the field of their glasses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1559">&#34;What are we looking at, at this moment?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1560">&#34;At the northern part of the &#39;Sea of Clouds,&#39;&#34; answered Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1561">&#34;We are too far off to recognize its nature. </span>
      <span id="f1562">Are these plains composed of arid sand, as the first astronomer maintained? </span>
      <span id="f1563">Or are they nothing but immense forests, according to M. </span>
      <span id="f1564">Warren de la Rue&#39;s opinion, who gives the moon an atmosphere, though a very low and a very dense one? </span>
      <span id="f1565">That we shall know by and by. </span>
      <span id="f1566">We must affirm nothing until we are in a position to do so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1567">This &#34;Sea of Clouds&#34; is rather doubtfully marked out upon the maps. </span>
      <span id="f1568">It is supposed that these vast plains are strewn with blocks of lava from the neighbouring volcanoes on its right, Ptolemy, Purbach, Arzachel. </span>
      <span id="f1569">But the projectile was advancing, and sensibly nearing it. </span>
      <span id="f1570">Soon there appeared the heights which bound this sea at this northern limit. </span>
      <span id="f1571">Before them rose a mountain radiant with beauty, the top of which seemed lost in an eruption of solar rays.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1572">&#34;That is—?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1573">&#34;Copernicus,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1574">&#34;Let us see Copernicus.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1575">This mount situated in 9° north latitude and 20° east longitude, rose to a height of 10,600 feet above the surface of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1576">It is quite visible from the earth; and astronomers can study it with ease, particularly during the phase between the last quarter and the new moon, because then the shadows are thrown lengthways from east to west, allowing them to measure the heights.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1577">This Copernicus forms the most important of the radiating system, situated in the southern hemisphere, according to Tycho Brahé. </span>
      <span id="f1578">It rises isolated like a gigantic lighthouse on that portion of the Sea of Clouds, which is bounded by the &#34;Sea of Tempests,&#34; thus lighting by its splendid rays two oceans at a time. </span>
      <span id="f1579">It was a sight without an equal, those long luminous trains, so dazzling in the full moon, and which, passing the boundary chain on the north, extends to the &#34;Sea of Rains.&#34; At one o&#39;clock of the terrestrial morning, the projectile, like a balloon borne into space, overlooked the top of this superb mountain. </span>
      <span id="f1580">Barbicane could recognize perfectly its chief features. </span>
      <span id="f1581">Copernicus is comprised in the series of ringed mountains of the first order, in the division of great circles. </span>
      <span id="f1582">Like Kepler and Aristarchus, which overlook the Ocean of Tempests, sometimes it appeared like a brilliant point through the cloudy light, and was taken for a volcano in activity. </span>
      <span id="f1583">But it is only an extinct one,—like all on that side of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1584">Its circumference showed a diameter of about twenty-two leagues. </span>
      <span id="f1585">The glasses discovered traces of stratification produced by successive eruptions, and the neighbourhood was strewn with volcanic remains which still choked some of the craters.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">&#34;There exist,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;several kinds of circles on the surface of the moon, and it is easy to see that Copernicus belongs to the radiating class. </span>
      <span id="f1587">If we were nearer, we should see the cones bristling on the inside, which in former times were so many fiery mouths. </span>
      <span id="f1588">A curious arrangement, and one without an exception on the lunar disc, is that the interior surface of these circles is the reverse of the exterior, and contrary to the form taken by terrestrial craters. </span>
      <span id="f1589">It follows, then, that the general curve of the bottom of these circles gives a sphere of a smaller diameter than that of the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1590">&#34;And why this peculiar disposition?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1591">&#34;We do not know,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1592">&#34;What splendid radiation!&#34; said Michel. </span>
      <span id="f1593">&#34;One could hardly see a finer spectacle, I think.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1594">&#34;What would you say, then,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;if chance should bear us towards the southern hemisphere?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1595">&#34;Well, I should say that it was still more beautiful,&#34; retorted Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1596">At this moment the projectile hung perpendicularly over the circle. </span>
      <span id="f1597">The circumference of Copernicus formed almost a perfect circle, and its steep escarpments were clearly defined. </span>
      <span id="f1598">They could even distinguish a second ringed enclosure. </span>
      <span id="f1599">Around spread a greyish plain, of a wild aspect, on which every relief was marked in yellow. </span>
      <span id="f1600">At the bottom of the circle, as if enclosed in a jewel case, sparkled for one instant two or three eruptive cones, like enormous dazzling gems. </span>
      <span id="f1601">Towards the north the escarpments were lowered by a depression which would probably have given access to the interior of the crater.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1602">In passing over the surrounding plains, Barbicane noticed a great number of less important mountains; and among others a little ringed one called Guy Lussac, the breadth of which measured twelve miles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1603">Towards the south, the plain was very flat, without one elevation, without one projection. </span>
      <span id="f1604">Towards the north, on the contrary, till where it was bounded by the Sea of Storms it resembled a liquid surface agitated by a storm, of which the hills and hollows formed a succession of waves suddenly congealed. </span>
      <span id="f1605">Over the whole of this, and in all directions, lay the luminous lines, all converging to the summit of Copernicus.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1606">The travellers discussed the origin of these strange rays; but they could not determine their nature any more than terrestrial observers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1607">&#34;But why,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;should not these rays be simply spurs of mountains which reflect more vividly the light of the sun?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1608">&#34;No,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;if it was so, under certain conditions of the moon, these ridges would cast shadows, and they do not cast any.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1609">And indeed, these rays only appeared when the orb of day was in opposition to the moon, and disappeared as soon as its rays became oblique.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1610">&#34;But how have they endeavoured to explain these lines of light?&#34; asked Michel; &#34;for I cannot believe that savants would ever be stranded for want of an explanation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1611">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;Herschel has put forward an opinion, but he did not venture to affirm it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1612">&#34;Never mind. </span>
      <span id="f1613">What was the opinion?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1614">&#34;He thought that these rays might be streams of cooled lava which shone when the sun beat straight upon them. </span>
      <span id="f1615">It may be so; but nothing can be less certain. </span>
      <span id="f1616">Besides, if we pass nearer to Tycho, we shall be in a better position to find out the cause of this radiation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1617">&#34;Do you know, my friends, what that plain, seen from the height we are at, resembles?&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1618">&#34;No,&#34; replied Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1619">&#34;Very well; with all those pieces of lava lengthened like rockets, it resembles an immense game of spelikans thrown pell-mell. </span>
      <span id="f1620">There wants but the hook to pull them out one by one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1621">&#34;Do be serious,&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1622">&#34;Well, let us be serious,&#34; replied Michel quietly; &#34;and instead of spelikans, let us put bones. </span>
      <span id="f1623">This plain would then be nothing but an immense cemetery, on which would repose the mortal remains of thousands of extinct generations. </span>
      <span id="f1624">Do you prefer that high-flown comparison?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1625">&#34;One is as good as the other,&#34; retorted Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1626">&#34;My word, you are difficult to please,&#34; answered Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1627">&#34;My worthy friend,&#34; continued the matter-of-fact Barbicane, &#34;it matters but little what it _resembles_, when we do not know what it _is_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1628">&#34;Well answered,&#34; exclaimed Michel. </span>
      <span id="f1629">&#34;That will teach me to reason with savants.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1630">But the projectile continued to advance with almost uniform speed around the lunar disc. </span>
      <span id="f1631">The travellers, we may easily imagine, did not dream of taking a moment&#39;s rest. </span>
      <span id="f1632">Every minute changed the landscape which fled from beneath their gaze. </span>
      <span id="f1633">About half-past one o&#39;clock in the morning, they caught a glimpse of the tops of another mountain. </span>
      <span id="f1634">Barbicane, consulting his map, recognized Eratosthenes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1635">It was a ringed mountain 9000 feet high, and one of those circles so numerous on this satellite. </span>
      <span id="f1636">With regard to this, Barbicane related Kepler&#39;s singular opinion on the formation of circles. </span>
      <span id="f1637">According to that celebrated mathematician, these crater-like cavities had been dug by the hand of man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1638">&#34;For what purpose?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1639">&#34;For a very natural one,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1640">&#34;The Selenites might have undertaken these immense works and dug these enormous holes for a refuge and shield from the solar rays which beat upon them during fifteen consecutive days.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1641">&#34;The Selenites are not fools,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1642">&#34;A singular idea,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;but it is probable that Kepler did not know the true dimensions of these circles, for the digging of them would have been the work of giants quite impossible for the Selenites.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1643">&#34;Why? </span>
      <span id="f1644">if weight on the moon&#39;s surface is six times less than on the earth?&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1645">&#34;But if the Selenites are six times smaller?&#34; retorted Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1646">&#34;And if there are no Selenites?&#34; added Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1647">This put an end to the discussion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1648">Soon Eratosthenes disappeared under the horizon without the projectile being sufficiently near to allow of close observation. </span>
      <span id="f1649">This mountain separated the Apennines from the Carpathians. </span>
      <span id="f1650">In the lunar orography they have discerned some chains of mountains, which are chiefly distributed over the northern hemisphere. </span>
      <span id="f1651">Some, however, occupy certain portions of the southern hemisphere also.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1652">About two o&#39;clock in the morning Barbicane found that they were above the twentieth lunar parallel. </span>
      <span id="f1653">The distance of the projectile from the moon was not more than 600 miles. </span>
      <span id="f1654">Barbicane, now perceiving that the projectile was steadily approaching the lunar disc, did not despair, if of reaching her, at least of discovering the secrets of her configuration.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>