<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1655">CHAPTER XIII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1656">LUNAR LANDSCAPES.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1657">At half-past two in the morning, the projectile was over the thirteenth lunar parallel and at the effective distance of 500 miles, reduced by the glasses to five. </span>
      <span id="f1658">It still seemed impossible, however, that it could ever touch any part of the disc. </span>
      <span id="f1659">Its motive speed, comparatively so moderate, was inexplicable to President Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1660">At that distance from the moon it must have been considerable, to enable it to bear up against her attraction. </span>
      <span id="f1661">Here was a phenomenon the cause of which escaped them again. </span>
      <span id="f1662">Besides, time failed them to investigate the cause. </span>
      <span id="f1663">All lunar relief was defiling under the eyes of the travellers, and they would not lose a single detail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1664">Under the glasses the disc appeared at the distance of five miles. </span>
      <span id="f1665">What would an aeronaut, borne to this distance from the earth, distinguish on its surface? </span>
      <span id="f1666">We cannot say, since the greatest ascension has not been more than 25,000 feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1667">This, however, is an exact description of what Barbicane and his companions saw at this height. </span>
      <span id="f1668">Large patches of different colours appeared on the disc. </span>
      <span id="f1669">Selenographers are not agreed upon the nature of these colours. </span>
      <span id="f1670">There are several, and rather vividly marked. </span>
      <span id="f1671">Julius Schmidt pretends that, if the terrestrial oceans were dried up, a Selenite observer could not distinguish on the globe a greater diversity of shades between the oceans and the continental plains than those on the moon present to a terrestrial observer. </span>
      <span id="f1672">According to him, the colour common to the vast plains known by the name of &#34;seas&#34; is a dark grey mixed with green and brown. </span>
      <span id="f1673">Some of the large craters present the same appearance. </span>
      <span id="f1674">Barbicane knew this opinion of the German selenographer, an opinion shared by Bœer and Moedler. </span>
      <span id="f1675">Observation has proved that right was on their side, and not on that of some astronomers who admit the existence of only grey on the moon&#39;s surface. </span>
      <span id="f1676">In some parts green was very distinct, such as springs, according to Julius Schmidt, from the seas of Serenity and Humours. </span>
      <span id="f1677">Barbicane also noticed large craters, without any interior cones, which shed a bluish tint similar to the reflection of a sheet of steel freshly polished. </span>
      <span id="f1678">These colours belonged really to the lunar disc, and did not result, as some astronomers say, either from the imperfection in the objective of the glasses or from the interposition of the terrestrial atmosphere.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1679">Not a doubt existed in Barbicane&#39;s mind with regard to it, as he observed it through space, and so could not commit any optical error. </span>
      <span id="f1680">He considered the establishment of this fact as an acquisition to science. </span>
      <span id="f1681">Now, were these shades of green, belonging to tropical vegetation, kept up by a low dense atmosphere? </span>
      <span id="f1682">He could not yet say.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1683">Farther on, he noticed a reddish tint, quite defined. </span>
      <span id="f1684">The same shade had before been observed at the bottom of an isolated enclosure, known by the name of Lichtenburg&#39;s circle, which is situated near the Hercynian mountains, on the borders of the moon; but they could not tell the nature of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1685">They were not more fortunate with regard to another peculiarity of the disc, for they could not decide upon the cause of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1686">Michel Ardan was watching near the president, when he noticed long white lines, vividly lighted up by the direct rays of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f1687">It was a succession of luminous furrows, very different from the radiation of Copernicus not long before; they ran parallel with each other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1688">Michel, with his usual readiness, hastened to exclaim,— &#34;Look there! </span>
      <span id="f1689">cultivated fields!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1690">&#34;Cultivated fields!&#34; replied Nicholl, shrugging his shoulders.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1691">&#34;Ploughed, at all events,&#34; retorted Michel Ardan; &#34;but what labourers those Selenites must be, and what giant oxen they must harness to their plough to cut such furrows!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1692">&#34;They are not furrows,&#34; said Barbicane; &#34;they are _rifts_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1693">&#34;Rifts? </span>
      <span id="f1694">stuff!&#34; replied Michel mildly; &#34;but what do you mean by &#39;rifts&#39; in the scientific world?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1695">Barbicane immediately enlightened his companion as to what he knew about lunar rifts. </span>
      <span id="f1696">He knew that they were a kind of furrow found on every part of the disc which was not mountainous; that these furrows, generally isolated, measured from 400 to 500 leagues in length; that their breadth varied from 1000 to 1500 yards, and that their borders were strictly parallel; but he knew nothing more either of their formation or their nature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1697">Barbicane, through his glasses, observed these rifts with great attention. </span>
      <span id="f1698">He noticed that their borders were formed of steep declivities; they were long parallel ramparts, and with some small amount of imagination he might have admitted the existence of long lines of fortifications, raised by Selenite engineers. </span>
      <span id="f1699">Of these different rifts some were perfectly straight, as if cut by a line; others were slightly curved, though still keeping their borders parallel; some crossed each other, some cut through craters; here they wound through ordinary cavities, such as Posidonius or Petavius; there they wound through the seas, such as the Sea of Serenity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1700">These natural accidents naturally excited the imaginations of these terrestrial astronomers. </span>
      <span id="f1701">The first observations had not discovered these rifts. </span>
      <span id="f1702">Neither Hevelius, Cassim, La Hire, nor Herschel seemed to have known them. </span>
      <span id="f1703">It was Schroeter who in 1789 first drew attention to them. </span>
      <span id="f1704">Others followed who studied them, as Pastorff, Gruithuysen, Bœer, and Moedler. </span>
      <span id="f1705">At this time their number amounts to seventy; but, if they have been counted, their nature has not yet been determined; they are certainly not fortifications, any more than they are the ancient beds of dried-up rivers; for, on one side, the waters, so slight on the moon&#39;s surface, could never have worn such drains for themselves; and, on the other, they often cross craters of great elevation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1706">We must, however, allow that Michel Ardan had &#34;an idea,&#34; and that, without knowing it, he coincided in that respect with Julius Schmidt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1707">&#34;Why,&#34; said he, &#34;should not these unaccountable appearances be simply phenomena of vegetation?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1708">&#34;What do you mean?&#34; asked Barbicane quickly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1709">&#34;Do not excite yourself, my worthy president,&#34; replied Michel; &#34;might it not be possible that the dark lines forming that bastion were rows of trees regularly placed?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1710">&#34;You stick to your vegetation, then?&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1711">&#34;I like,&#34; retorted Michel Ardan, &#34;to explain what you savants cannot explain; at least my hypothesis has the advantage of indicating why these rifts disappear, or seem to disappear, at certain seasons.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1712">&#34;And for what reason?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1713">&#34;For the reason that the trees become invisible when they lose their leaves, and visible when they regain them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1714">&#34;Your explanation is ingenious, my dear companion,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;but inadmissible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1715">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1716">&#34;Because, so to speak, there are no seasons on the moon&#39;s surface, and that, consequently, the phenomena of vegetation of which you speak cannot occur.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1717">Indeed, the slight obliquity of the lunar axis keeps the sun at an almost equal height in every latitude. </span>
      <span id="f1718">Above the equatorial regions the radiant orb almost invariably occupies the zenith, and does not pass the limits of the horizon in the polar regions; thus, according to each region, there reigns a perpetual winter, spring, summer, or autumn, as in the planet Jupiter, whose axis is but little inclined upon its orbit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1719">What origin do they attribute to these rifts? </span>
      <span id="f1720">That is a question difficult to solve. </span>
      <span id="f1721">They are certainly anterior to the formation of craters and circles, for several have introduced themselves by breaking through their circular ramparts. </span>
      <span id="f1722">Thus it may be that, contemporary with the latter geological epochs, they are due to the expansion of natural forces.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1723">But the projectile had now attained the 40° of lunar lat., at a distance not exceeding 400 miles. </span>
      <span id="f1724">Through the glasses objects appeared to be only four miles distant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1725">At this point, under their feet, rose Mount Helicon, 1520 feet high, and round about the left rose moderate elevations, enclosing a small portion of the &#34;Sea of Rains,&#34; under the name of the Gulf of Iris. </span>
      <span id="f1726">The terrestrial atmosphere would have to be one hundred and seventy times more transparent than it is, to allow astronomers to make perfect observations on the moon&#39;s surface; but in the void in which the projectile floated no fluid interposed itself between the eye of the observer and the object observed. </span>
      <span id="f1727">And more, Barbicane found himself carried to a greater distance than the most powerful telescopes had ever done before, either that of Lord Rosse or that of the Rocky Mountains. </span>
      <span id="f1728">He was, therefore, under extremely favourable conditions for solving that great question of the habitability of the moon; but the solution still escaped him; he could distinguish nothing but desert beds, immense plains, and towards the north, arid mountains. </span>
      <span id="f1729">Not a work betrayed the hand of man; not a ruin marked his course; not a group of animals was to be seen indicating life, even in an inferior degree. </span>
      <span id="f1730">In no part was there life, in no part was there an appearance of vegetation. </span>
      <span id="f1731">Of the three kingdoms which share the terrestrial globe between them, one alone was represented on the lunar and that the mineral.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1732">&#34;Ah, indeed!&#34; said Michel Ardan, a little out of countenance; &#34;then you see no one?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1733">&#34;No,&#34; answered Nicholl; &#34;up to this time not a man, not an animal, not a tree! </span>
      <span id="f1734">After all, whether the atmosphere has taken refuge at the bottom of cavities, in the midst of the circles, or even on the opposite face of the moon, we cannot decide.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1735">&#34;Besides,&#34; added Barbicane, &#34;even to the most piercing eye a man cannot be distinguished farther than three miles and a half off; so that, if there are any Selenites, they can see our projectile, but we cannot see them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1736">Towards four in the morning, at the height of the fiftieth parallel, the distance was reduced to 300 miles. </span>
      <span id="f1737">To the left ran a line of mountains capriciously shaped, lying in the full light. </span>
      <span id="f1738">To the right, on the contrary, lay a black hollow resembling a vast well, unfathomable and gloomy, drilled into the lunar soil.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1739">This hole was the &#34;Black Lake;&#34; it was Pluto, a deep circle which can be conveniently studied from the earth, between the last quarter and the new moon, when the shadows fall from west to east.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1740">This black colour is rarely met with on the surface of the satellite. </span>
      <span id="f1741">As yet it has only been recognized in the depths of the circle of Endymion, to the east of the Cold Sea, in the northern hemisphere, and at the bottom of Grimaldi&#39;s circle, on the equator, towards the eastern border of the orb.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1742">Pluto is an annular mountain, situated in 51° north latitude, and 9° east longitude. </span>
      <span id="f1743">Its circuit is forty-seven miles long and thirty-two broad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1744">Barbicane regretted that they were not passing directly above this vast opening. </span>
      <span id="f1745">There was an abyss to fathom, perhaps some mysterious phenomenon to surprise; but the projectile&#39;s course could not be altered. </span>
      <span id="f1746">They must rigidly submit. </span>
      <span id="f1747">They could not guide a balloon, still less a projectile, when once enclosed within its walls. </span>
      <span id="f1748">Towards five in the morning the northern limits of the Sea of Rains was at length passed. </span>
      <span id="f1749">The mounts of Condamine and Fontenelle remained—one on the right, the other on the left. </span>
      <span id="f1750">That part of the disc beginning with 60° was becoming quite mountainous. </span>
      <span id="f1751">The glasses brought them to within two miles, less than that separating the summit of Mont Blanc from the level of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f1752">The whole region was bristling with spikes and circles. </span>
      <span id="f1753">Towards the 60° Philolaus stood predominant at a height of 5550 feet with its elliptical crater, and seen from this distance, the disc showed a very fantastical appearance. </span>
      <span id="f1754">Landscapes were presented to the eye under very different conditions from those on the earth, and also very inferior to them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1755">The moon having no atmosphere, the consequences arising from the absence of this gaseous envelope have already been shown. </span>
      <span id="f1756">No twilight on her surface; night following day and day following night with the suddenness of a lamp which is extinguished or lighted amidst profound darkness,—no transition from cold to heat, the temperature falling in an instant from boiling point to the cold of space.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1757">Another consequence of this want of air is that absolute darkness reigns where the sun&#39;s rays do not penetrate. </span>
      <span id="f1758">That which on earth is called diffusion of light, that luminous matter which the air holds in suspension, which creates the twilight and the daybreak, which produces the _umbræ_ and the _penumbræ_, and all the magic of _chiaro-oscuro_, does not exist on the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1759">Hence the harshness of contrasts, which only admit of two colours, black and white. </span>
      <span id="f1760">If a Selenite were to shade his eyes from the sun&#39;s rays, the sky would seem absolutely black, and the stars would shine to him as on the darkest night. </span>
      <span id="f1761">Judge of the impression produced on Barbicane and his three friends by this strange scene! </span>
      <span id="f1762">Their eyes were confused. </span>
      <span id="f1763">They could no longer grasp the respective distances of the different plains. </span>
      <span id="f1764">A lunar landscape without the softening of the phenomena of _chiaro-oscuro_ could not be rendered by an earthly landscape painter: it would be spots of ink on a white page—nothing more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1765">This aspect was not altered even when the projectile, at the height of 80°, was only separated from the moon by a distance of fifty miles; nor even when, at five in the morning, it passed at less than twenty-five miles from the mountain of Gioja, a distance reduced by the glasses to a quarter of a mile. </span>
      <span id="f1766">It seemed as if the moon might be touched by the hand! </span>
      <span id="f1767">It seemed impossible that, before long, the projectile would not strike her, if only at the north pole, the brilliant arch of which was so distinctly visible on the black sky.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1768">Michel Ardan wanted to open one of the scuttles and throw himself on to the moon&#39;s surface! </span>
      <span id="f1769">A very useless attempt; for if the projectile could not attain any point whatever of the satellite, Michel, carried along by its motion, could not attain it either.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1770">At that moment, at six o&#39;clock, the lunar pole appeared. </span>
      <span id="f1771">The disc only presented to the travellers&#39; gaze one half brilliantly lit up, whilst the other disappeared in the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1772">Suddenly the projectile passed the line of demarcation between intense light and absolute darkness, and was plunged in profound night!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>