<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1773">CHAPTER XIV.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1774">THE NIGHT OF THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOUR HOURS       AND A HALF.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1775">At the moment when this phenomenon took place so rapidly, the projectile was skirting the moon&#39;s north pole at less than twenty-five miles distance. </span>
      <span id="f1776">Some seconds had sufficed to plunge it into the absolute darkness of space. </span>
      <span id="f1777">The transition was so sudden, without shade, without gradation of light, without attenuation of the luminous waves, that the orb seemed to have been extinguished by a powerful blow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1778">&#34;Melted, disappeared!&#34; Michel Ardan exclaimed, aghast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1779">Indeed, there was neither reflection nor shadow. </span>
      <span id="f1780">Nothing more was to be seen of that disc, formerly so dazzling. </span>
      <span id="f1781">The darkness was complete, and rendered even more so by the rays from the stars. </span>
      <span id="f1782">It was &#34;that blackness&#34; in which the lunar nights are insteeped, which last three hundred and four hours and a half at each point of the disc, a long night resulting from the equality of the translatory and rotary movements of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1783">The projectile, immerged in the conical shadow of the satellite, experienced the action of the solar rays no more than any of its invisible points.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1784">In the interior, the obscurity was complete. </span>
      <span id="f1785">They could not see each other. </span>
      <span id="f1786">Hence the necessity of dispelling the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1787">However desirous Barbicane might be to husband the gas, the reserve of which was small, he was obliged to ask from it a fictitious light, an expensive brilliancy which the sun then refused.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1788">&#34;Devil take the radiant orb!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;which forces us to expend gas, instead of giving us his rays gratuitously.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1789">&#34;Do not let us accuse the sun,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;it is not his fault, but that of the moon, which has come and placed herself like a screen between us and it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1790">&#34;It is the sun!&#34; continued Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1791">&#34;It is the moon!&#34; retorted Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1792">An idle dispute, which Barbicane put an end to by saying,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1793">&#34;My friends, it is neither the fault of the sun nor of the moon; it is the fault of the _projectile_, which, instead of rigidly following its course, has awkwardly missed it. </span>
      <span id="f1794">To be more just, it is the fault of that unfortunate meteor which has so deplorably altered our first direction.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1795">&#34;Well,&#34; replied Michel Ardan, &#34;as the matter is settled, let us have breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f1796">After a whole night of watching it is fair to build ourselves up a little.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1797">This proposal meeting with no contradiction, Michel prepared the repast in a few minutes. </span>
      <span id="f1798">But they ate for eating&#39;s sake, they drank without toasts, without hurrahs. </span>
      <span id="f1799">The bold travellers being borne away into gloomy space, without their accustomed cortège of rays, felt a vague uneasiness at their hearts. </span>
      <span id="f1800">The &#34;strange&#34; shadow so dear to Victor Hugo&#39;s pen bound them on all sides. </span>
      <span id="f1801">But they talked over the interminable night of three hundred and fifty-four hours and a half, nearly fifteen days, which the law of physics has imposed on the inhabitants of the moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1802">Barbicane gave his friends some explanation of the causes and the consequences of this curious phenomenon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1803">&#34;Curious indeed,&#34; said they; &#34;for, if each hemisphere of the moon is deprived of solar light for fifteen days, that above which we now float does not even enjoy during its long night any view of the earth so beautifully lit up. </span>
      <span id="f1804">In a word she has no moon (applying this designation to our globe) but on one side of her disc. </span>
      <span id="f1805">Now if this were the case with the earth,—if, for example, Europe never saw the moon, and she was only visible at the Antipodes, imagine to yourself the astonishment of a European on arriving in Australia.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1806">&#34;They would make the voyage for nothing but to see the moon!&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1807">&#34;Very well!&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;that astonishment is reserved for the Selenites who inhabit the face of the moon opposite to the earth, a face which is ever invisible to our countrymen of the terrestrial globe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1808">&#34;And which we should have seen,&#34; added Nicholl, &#34;if we had arrived here when the moon was new, that is to say fifteen days later.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1809">&#34;I will add, to make amends,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;that the inhabitants of the visible face are singularly favoured by nature, to the detriment of their brethren on the invisible face. </span>
      <span id="f1810">The latter, as you see, have dark nights of 354 hours, without one single ray to break the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1811">The other, on the contrary, when the sun which has given its light for fifteen days sinks below the horizon, see a splendid orb rise on the opposite horizon. </span>
      <span id="f1812">It is the earth, which is thirteen times greater than that diminutive moon that we know;—the earth which develops itself at a diameter of two degrees, and which sheds a light thirteen times greater than that qualified by atmospheric strata—the earth which only disappears at the moment when the sun reappears in its turn!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1813">&#34;Nicely worded!&#34; said Michel, &#34;slightly academical perhaps.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1814">&#34;It follows, then,&#34; continued Barbicane, without knitting his brows, &#34;that the visible face of the disc must be very agreeable to inhabit, since it always looks on either the sun when the moon is full, or on the earth when the moon is new.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1815">&#34;But,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;that advantage must be well compensated by the insupportable heat which the light brings with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1816">&#34;The inconvenience, in that respect, is the same for the two faces, for the earth&#39;s light is evidently deprived of heat. </span>
      <span id="f1817">But the invisible face is still more searched by the heat than the visible face. </span>
      <span id="f1818">I say that for _you_, Nicholl, because Michel will probably not understand.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1819">&#34;Thank you,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1820">&#34;Indeed,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;when the invisible face receives at the same time light and heat from the sun, it is because the moon is new; that is to say, she is situated between the sun and the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1821">It follows, then, considering the position which she occupies in opposition when full, that she is nearer to the sun by twice her distance from the earth; and that distance may be estimated at the two-hundredth part of that which separates the sun from the earth, or in round numbers 400,000 miles. </span>
      <span id="f1822">So that invisible face is so much nearer to the sun when she receives its rays.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1823">&#34;Quite right,&#34; replied Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1824">&#34;On the contrary,&#34; continued Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1825">&#34;One moment,&#34; said Michel, interrupting his grave companion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1826">&#34;What do you want?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1827">&#34;I ask to be allowed to continue the explanation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1828">&#34;And why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1829">&#34;To prove that I understand.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1830">&#34;Get along with you,&#34; said Barbicane, smiling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1831">&#34;On the contrary,&#34; said Michel, imitating the tone and gestures of the president, &#34;on the contrary, when the visible face of the moon is lit by the sun, it is because the moon is full, that is to say, opposite the sun with regard to the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1832">The distance separating it from the radiant orb is then increased in round numbers to 400,000 miles, and the heat which she receives must be a little less.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1833">&#34;Very well said!&#34; exclaimed Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1834">&#34;Do you know, Michel, that, for an amateur, you are intelligent.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1835">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Michel coolly, &#34;we are all so on the Boulevard des Italiens.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1836">Barbicane gravely clasped the hand of his amiable companion, and continued to enumerate the advantages reserved for the inhabitants of the visible face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1837">Amongst others, he mentioned eclipses of the sun, which only take place on this side of the lunar disc; since, in order that they may take place, it is necessary for the moon to be _in opposition_. </span>
      <span id="f1838">These eclipses, caused by the interposition of the earth between the moon and the sun, can last _two hours_; during which time, by reason of the rays refracted by its atmosphere, the terrestrial globe can appear as nothing but a black point upon the sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1839">&#34;So,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;there is a hemisphere, that invisible hemisphere which is very ill supplied, very ill treated, by nature.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1840">&#34;Never mind,&#34; replied Michel; &#34;if we ever become Selenites, we will inhabit the visible face. </span>
      <span id="f1841">I like the light.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1842">&#34;Unless, by any chance,&#34; answered Nicholl, &#34;the atmosphere should be condensed on the other side, as certain astronomers pretend.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1843">&#34;That would be a consideration,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1844">Breakfast over, the observers returned to their post. </span>
      <span id="f1845">They tried to see through the darkened scuttles by extinguishing all light in the projectile; but not a luminous spark made its way through the darkness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1846">One inexplicable fact preoccupied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1847">Why, having passed within such a short distance of the moon—about twenty-five miles only—why the projectile had not fallen? </span>
      <span id="f1848">If its speed had been enormous, he could have understood that the fall would not have taken place; but, with a relatively moderate speed, that resistance to the moon&#39;s attraction could not be explained. </span>
      <span id="f1849">Was the projectile under some foreign influence? </span>
      <span id="f1850">Did some kind of body retain it in the ether? </span>
      <span id="f1851">It was quite evident that it could never reach any point of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1852">Whither was it going? </span>
      <span id="f1853">Was it going farther from, or nearing, the disc? </span>
      <span id="f1854">Was it being borne in that profound darkness through the infinity of space? </span>
      <span id="f1855">How could they learn, how calculate, in the midst of this night? </span>
      <span id="f1856">All these questions made Barbicane uneasy, but he could not solve them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1857">Certainly, the invisible orb was _there_, perhaps only some few miles off; but neither he nor his companions could see it. </span>
      <span id="f1858">If there was any noise on its surface, they could not hear it. </span>
      <span id="f1859">Air, that medium of sound, was wanting to transmit the groanings of that moon which the Arabic legends call &#34;a man already half granite, and still breathing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1860">One must allow that that was enough to aggravate the most patient observers. </span>
      <span id="f1861">It was just that unknown hemisphere which was stealing from their sight. </span>
      <span id="f1862">That face which fifteen days sooner, or fifteen days later, had been, or would be, splendidly illuminated by the solar rays, was then being lost in utter darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1863">In fifteen days where would the projectile be? </span>
      <span id="f1864">Who could say? </span>
      <span id="f1865">Where would the chances of conflicting attractions have drawn it to? </span>
      <span id="f1866">The disappointment of the travellers in the midst of this utter darkness may be imagined. </span>
      <span id="f1867">All observation of the lunar disc was impossible. </span>
      <span id="f1868">The constellations alone claimed all their attention; and we must allow that the astronomers Faye, Charconac, and Secchi, never found themselves in circumstances so favourable for their observation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1869">Indeed, nothing could equal the splendour of this starry world, bathed in limpid ether. </span>
      <span id="f1870">Its diamonds set in the heavenly vault sparkled magnificently. </span>
      <span id="f1871">The eye took in the firmament from the Southern Cross to the North Star, those two constellations which in 12,000 years, by reason of the succession of equinoxes, will resign their part of polar stars, the one to Canopus in the southern hemisphere, the other to Wega in the northern. </span>
      <span id="f1872">Imagination loses itself in this sublime Infinity, amidst which the projectile was gravitating, like a new star created by the hand of man. </span>
      <span id="f1873">From a natural cause, these constellations shone with a soft lustre; they did not _twinkle_, for there was no atmosphere which, by the intervention of its layers unequally dense and of different degrees of humidity, produces this scintillation. </span>
      <span id="f1874">These stars were soft eyes, looking out into the dark night, amidst the silence of absolute space.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1875">Long did the travellers stand mute, watching the constellated firmament, upon which the moon, like a vast screen, made an enormous black hole. </span>
      <span id="f1876">But at length a painful sensation drew them from their watchings. </span>
      <span id="f1877">This was an intense cold, which soon covered the inside of the glass of the scuttles with a thick coating of ice. </span>
      <span id="f1878">The sun was no longer warming the projectile with its direct rays, and thus it was losing the heat stored up in its walls by degrees. </span>
      <span id="f1879">This heat was rapidly evaporating into space by radiation, and a considerably lower temperature was the result. </span>
      <span id="f1880">The humidity of the interior was changed into ice upon contact with the glass, preventing all observation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1881">Nicholl consulted the thermometer, and saw that it had fallen to seventeen degrees (centigrade) below zero.* So that, in spite of the many reasons for economizing, Barbicane, after having begged light from the gas, was also obliged to beg for heat. </span>
      <span id="f1882">The projectile&#39;s low temperature was no longer endurable. </span>
      <span id="f1883">Its tenants would have been frozen to death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1884">*1° Fahr. </span>
      <span id="f1885">(Ed.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1886">&#34;Well!&#34; observed Michel, &#34;we cannot reasonably complain of the monotony of our journey! </span>
      <span id="f1887">What variety we have had, at least in temperature. </span>
      <span id="f1888">Now we are blinded with light and saturated with heat, like the Indians of the Pampas! </span>
      <span id="f1889">now plunged into profound darkness, amidst the cold like the Esquimauxs of the north pole. </span>
      <span id="f1890">No, indeed! </span>
      <span id="f1891">we have no right to complain; nature does wonders in our honour.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1892">&#34;But,&#34; asked Nicholl, &#34;what is the temperature outside?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1893">&#34;Exactly that of the planetary space,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1894">&#34;Then,&#34; continued Michel Ardan, &#34;would not this be the time to make the experiment which we dared not attempt when we were drowned in the sun&#39;s rays?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1895">&#34;It is now or never,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;for we are in a good position to verify the temperature of space, and see if Fourier or Pouillet&#39;s calculations are exact.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1896">&#34;In any case it is cold,&#34; said Michel. </span>
      <span id="f1897">&#34;See! </span>
      <span id="f1898">the steam of the interior is condensing on the glasses of the scuttles. </span>
      <span id="f1899">If the fall continues, the vapour of our breath will fall in snow around us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1900">&#34;Let us prepare a thermometer,&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1901">We may imagine that an ordinary thermometer would afford no result under the circumstances in which this instrument was to be exposed. </span>
      <span id="f1902">The mercury would have been frozen in its ball, as below forty-two degrees below zero* it is no longer liquid. </span>
      <span id="f1903">But Barbicane had furnished himself with a spirit thermometer on Wafferdin&#39;s system, which gives the minima of excessively low temperatures.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1904">*-44° Fahr.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1905">Before beginning the experiment, this instrument was compared with an ordinary one, and then Barbicane prepared to use it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1906">&#34;How shall we set about it?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1907">&#34;Nothing is easier,&#34; replied Michel Ardan, who was never at a loss. </span>
      <span id="f1908">&#34;We open the scuttle rapidly; throw out the instrument; it follows the projectile with exemplary docility; and a quarter of an hour after, draw it in.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1909">&#34;With the hand?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1910">&#34;With the hand,&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1911">&#34;Well then, my friend, do not expose yourself,&#34; answered Barbicane, &#34;for the hand that you draw in again will be nothing but a stump frozen and deformed by the frightful cold.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1912">&#34;Really!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1913">&#34;You will feel as if you had had a terrible burn, like that of iron at a white heat; for whether the heat leaves our bodies briskly or enters briskly, it is exactly the same thing. </span>
      <span id="f1914">Besides, I am not at all certain that the objects we have thrown out are still following us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1915">&#34;Why not?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1916">&#34;Because, if we are passing through an atmosphere of the slightest density, these objects will be retarded. </span>
      <span id="f1917">Again, the darkness prevents our seeing if they still float around us. </span>
      <span id="f1918">But in order not to expose ourselves to the loss of our thermometer, we will fasten it, and we can then more easily pull it back again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1919">Barbicane&#39;s advice was followed. </span>
      <span id="f1920">Through the scuttle rapidly opened, Nicholl threw out the instrument which was held by a short cord, so that it might be more easily drawn up. </span>
      <span id="f1921">The scuttle had not been opened more than a second, but that second had sufficed to let in a most intense cold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1922">&#34;The devil!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;it is cold enough to freeze a white bear.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1923">Barbicane waited until half an hour had elapsed, which was more than time enough to allow the instrument to fall to the level of the surrounding temperature. </span>
      <span id="f1924">Then it was rapidly pulled in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1925">Barbicane calculated the quantity of spirits of wine overflowed into the little phial soldered to the lower part of the instrument, and said,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1926">&#34;A hundred and forty degrees centigrade* below zero!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1927">*-218° Fahr. </span>
      <span id="f1928">(Ed.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1929">M. </span>
      <span id="f1930">Pouillet was right and Fourier wrong. </span>
      <span id="f1931">That was the undoubted temperature of the starry space. </span>
      <span id="f1932">Such is, perhaps, that of the lunar continents, when the orb of night has lost by radiation all the heat which fifteen days of sun have poured into her.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>