<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1933">CHAPTER XV.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1934">HYPERBOLA OR PARABOLA.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1935">We may, perhaps, be astonished to find Barbicane and his companions so little occupied with the future reserved for them in their metal prison which was bearing them through the infinity of space. </span>
      <span id="f1936">Instead of asking where they were going, they passed their time making experiments, as if they had been quietly installed in their own study.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1937">We might answer that men so strong-minded were above such anxieties—that they did not trouble themselves about such trifles—and that they had something else to do than to occupy their minds with the future.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1938">The truth was that they were not masters of their projectile; they could neither check its course, nor alter its direction.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1939">A sailor can change the head of his ship as he pleases; an aeronaut can give a vertical motion to his balloon. </span>
      <span id="f1940">They, on the contrary, had no power over their vehicle. </span>
      <span id="f1941">Every maneuver was forbidden. </span>
      <span id="f1942">Hence the inclination to let things alone, or as the sailors say, &#34;let her run.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1943">Where did they find themselves at this moment, at eight o&#39;clock in the morning of the day called upon the earth the 6th of December? </span>
      <span id="f1944">Very certainly in the neighbourhood of the moon, and even near enough for her to look to them like an enormous black screen upon the firmament. </span>
      <span id="f1945">As to the distance which separated them, it was impossible to estimate it. </span>
      <span id="f1946">The projectile, held by some unaccountable force, had been within four miles of grazing the satellite&#39;s north pole.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1947">But since entering the cone of shadow these last two hours, had the distance increased or diminished? </span>
      <span id="f1948">Every point of mark was wanting by which to estimate both the direction and the speed of the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1949">Perhaps it was rapidly leaving the disc, so that it would soon quit the pure shadow. </span>
      <span id="f1950">Perhaps, again, on the other hand, it might be nearing it so much that in a short time it might strike some high point on the invisible hemisphere, which would doubtlessly have ended the journey much to the detriment of the travellers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1951">A discussion arose on this subject, and Michel Ardan, always ready with an explanation, gave it as his opinion that the projectile, held by the lunar attraction, would end by falling on the surface of the terrestrial globe like an aërolite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1952">&#34;First of all, my friend,&#34; answered Barbicane, &#34;every aërolite does not fall to the earth; it is only a small proportion which do so; and if we had passed into an aërolite, it does not necessarily follow that we should ever reach the surface of the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1953">&#34;But how if we get near enough?&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1954">&#34;Pure mistake,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1955">&#34;Have you not seen shooting stars rush through the sky by thousands at certain seasons?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1956">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1957">&#34;Well, these stars, or rather corpuscules, only shine when they are heated by gliding over the atmospheric layers. </span>
      <span id="f1958">Now, if they enter the atmosphere, they pass at least within forty miles of the earth, but they seldom fall upon it. </span>
      <span id="f1959">The same with our projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1960">It may approach very near to the moon, and yet not fall upon it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1961">&#34;But then,&#34; asked Michel, &#34;I shall be curious to know how our erring vehicle will act in space?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1962">&#34;I see but two hypotheses,&#34; replied Barbicane, after some moments&#39; reflection.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1963">&#34;What are they?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1964">&#34;The projectile has the choice between two mathematical curves, and it will follow one or the other according to the speed with which it is animated, and which at this moment I cannot estimate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1965">&#34;Yes,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;it will follow either a parabola or a hyperbola.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1966">&#34;Just so,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1967">&#34;With a certain speed it will assume the parabola, and with a greater the hyperbola.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1968">&#34;I like those grand words,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan; &#34;one knows directly what they mean. </span>
      <span id="f1969">And pray what is your parabola, if you please?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1970">&#34;My friend,&#34; answered the captain, &#34;the parabola is a curve of the second order, the result of the section of a cone intersected by a plane parallel to one of its sides.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1971">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1972">ah!&#34; said Michel, in a satisfied tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1973">&#34;It is very nearly,&#34; continued Nicholl, &#34;the course described by a bomb launched from a mortar.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1974">&#34;Perfect! </span>
      <span id="f1975">And the hyperbola?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1976">&#34;The hyperbola, Michel, is a curve of the second order, produced by the intersection of a conic surface and a plane parallel to its axis, and constitutes two branches separated one from the other, both tending indefinitely in the two directions.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1977">&#34;Is it possible!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan in a serious tone, as if they had told him of some serious event. </span>
      <span id="f1978">&#34;What I particularly like in your definition of the hyperbola (I was going to say hyperblague) is that it is still more obscure than the word you pretend to define.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1979">Nicholl and Barbicane cared little for Michel Ardan&#39;s fun. </span>
      <span id="f1980">They were deep in a scientific discussion. </span>
      <span id="f1981">What curve would the projectile follow? </span>
      <span id="f1982">was their hobby. </span>
      <span id="f1983">One maintained the hyperbola, the other the parabola. </span>
      <span id="f1984">They gave each other reasons bristling with _x_. </span>
      <span id="f1985">Their arguments were couched in language which made Michel jump. </span>
      <span id="f1986">The discussion was hot, and neither would give up his chosen curve to his adversary.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1987">This scientific dispute lasted so long that it made Michel very impatient.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1988">&#34;Now, gentlemen cosines, will you cease to throw parabolas and hyperbolas at each other&#39;s heads? </span>
      <span id="f1989">I want to understand the only interesting question in the whole affair. </span>
      <span id="f1990">We shall follow one or other of these curves? </span>
      <span id="f1991">Good. </span>
      <span id="f1992">But where will they lead us to?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1993">&#34;Nowhere,&#34; replied Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1994">&#34;How, nowhere?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1995">&#34;Evidently,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;they are open curves, which may be prolonged indefinitely.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1996">&#34;Ah, savants!&#34; cried Michel; &#34;and what are either the one or the other to us from the moment we know that they equally lead us into infinite space?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1997">Barbicane and Nicholl could not forbear smiling. </span>
      <span id="f1998">They had just been creating &#34;art for art&#39;s sake.&#34; Never had so idle a question been raised at such an inopportune moment. </span>
      <span id="f1999">The sinister truth remained that, whether hyperbolically or parabolically borne away, the projectile would never again meet either the earth or the moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2000">What would become of these bold travellers in the immediate future? </span>
      <span id="f2001">If they did not die of hunger, if they did not die of thirst, in some days, when the gas failed, they would die from want of air, unless the cold had killed them first. </span>
      <span id="f2002">Still, important as it was to economize the gas, the excessive lowness of the surrounding temperature obliged them to consume a certain quantity. </span>
      <span id="f2003">Strictly speaking, they could do without its _light_, but not without its _heat_. </span>
      <span id="f2004">Fortunately the caloric generated by Reiset&#39;s and Regnaut&#39;s apparatus raised the temperature of the interior of the projectile a little, and without much expenditure they were able to keep it bearable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2005">But observations had now become very difficult. </span>
      <span id="f2006">The dampness of the projectile was condensed on the windows and congealed immediately. </span>
      <span id="f2007">This cloudiness had to be dispersed continually. </span>
      <span id="f2008">In any case they might hope to be able to discover some phenomena of the highest interest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2009">But up to this time the disc remained dumb and dark. </span>
      <span id="f2010">It did not answer the multiplicity of questions put by these ardent minds; a matter which drew this reflection from Michel, apparently a just one,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2011">&#34;If ever we begin this journey over again, we shall do well to choose the time when the moon is at the full.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2012">&#34;Certainly,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;that circumstance will be more favourable. </span>
      <span id="f2013">I allow that the moon, immersed in the sun&#39;s rays, will not be visible during the transit, but instead we should see the earth, which would be full. </span>
      <span id="f2014">And what is more, if we were drawn round the moon, as at this moment, we should at least have the advantage of seeing the invisible part of her disc magnificently lit.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2015">&#34;Well said, Nicholl,&#34; replied Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f2016">&#34;What do you think, Barbicane?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2017">&#34;I think this,&#34; answered the grave president: &#34;If ever we begin this journey again, we shall start at the same time and under the same conditions. </span>
      <span id="f2018">Suppose we had attained our end, would it not have been better to have found continents in broad daylight than a country plunged in utter darkness? </span>
      <span id="f2019">Would not our first installation have been made under better circumstances? </span>
      <span id="f2020">Yes, evidently. </span>
      <span id="f2021">As to the _invisible_ side, we could have visited it in our exploring expeditions on the lunar globe. </span>
      <span id="f2022">So that the time of the full moon was well chosen. </span>
      <span id="f2023">But we ought to have arrived at the end; and in order to have so arrived, we ought to have suffered no deviation on the road.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2024">&#34;I have nothing to say to that,&#34; answered Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f2025">&#34;Here is, however, a good opportunity lost of observing the other side of the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2026">But the projectile was now describing in the shadow that incalculable course which no sight-mark would allow them to ascertain. </span>
      <span id="f2027">Had its direction been altered, either by the influence of the lunar attraction, or by the action of some unknown star? </span>
      <span id="f2028">Barbicane could not say. </span>
      <span id="f2029">But a change had taken place in the relative position of the vehicle; and Barbicane verified it about four in the morning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2030">The change consisted in this, that the base of the projectile had turned towards the moon&#39;s surface, and was so held by a perpendicular passing through its axis. </span>
      <span id="f2031">The attraction, that is to say the _weight_, had brought about this alteration. </span>
      <span id="f2032">The heaviest part of the projectile inclined towards the invisible disc as if it would fall upon it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2033">Was it falling? </span>
      <span id="f2034">Were the travellers attaining that much desired end? </span>
      <span id="f2035">No. </span>
      <span id="f2036">And the observation of a sign-point, quite inexplicable in itself, showed Barbicane that his projectile was not nearing the moon, and that it had shifted by following an almost concentric curve.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2037">This point of mark was a luminous brightness, which Nicholl sighted suddenly, on the limit of the horizon formed by the black disc. </span>
      <span id="f2038">This point could not be confounded with a star. </span>
      <span id="f2039">It was a reddish incandescence which increased by degrees, a decided proof that the projectile was shifting towards it and not falling normally on the surface of the moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2040">&#34;A volcano! </span>
      <span id="f2041">it is a volcano in action!&#34; cried Nicholl; &#34;a disembowelling of the interior fires of the moon! </span>
      <span id="f2042">That world is not quite extinguished.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2043">&#34;Yes, an eruption,&#34; replied Barbicane, who was carefully studying the phenomenon through his night glass. </span>
      <span id="f2044">&#34;What should it be, if not a volcano?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2045">&#34;But, then,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;in order to maintain that combustion, there must be air. </span>
      <span id="f2046">So an atmosphere _does_ surround that part of the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2047">&#34;_Perhaps_ so,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;but not necessarily. </span>
      <span id="f2048">The volcano, by the decomposition of certain substances, can provide its own oxygen, and thus throw flames into space. </span>
      <span id="f2049">It seems to me that the deflagration, by the intense brilliancy of the substances in combustion, is produced in pure oxygen. </span>
      <span id="f2050">We must not be in a hurry to proclaim the existence of a lunar atmosphere.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2051">The fiery mountain must have been situated about the 45° south latitude on the invisible part of the disc; but, to Barbicane&#39;s great displeasure, the curve which the projectile was describing was taking it far from the point indicated by the eruption. </span>
      <span id="f2052">Thus he could not determine its nature exactly. </span>
      <span id="f2053">Half an hour after being sighted, this luminous point had disappeared behind the dark horizon; but the verification of this phenomenon was of considerable consequence in their selenographic studies. </span>
      <span id="f2054">It proved that all heat had not yet disappeared from the bowels of this globe; and where heat exists, who can affirm that the vegetable kingdom, nay, even the animal kingdom itself, has not up to this time resisted all destructive influences? </span>
      <span id="f2055">The existence of this volcano in eruption, unmistakably seen by these earthly savants, would doubtless give rise to many theories favourable to the grave question of the habitability of the moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2056">Barbicane allowed himself to be carried away by these reflections. </span>
      <span id="f2057">He forgot himself in a deep reverie in which the mysterious destiny of the lunar world was uppermost. </span>
      <span id="f2058">He was seeking to combine together the facts observed up to that time, when a new incident recalled him briskly to reality. </span>
      <span id="f2059">This incident was more than a cosmical phenomenon; it was a threatened danger, the consequences of which might be disastrous in the extreme.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2060">Suddenly, in the midst of the ether, in the profound darkness, an enormous mass appeared. </span>
      <span id="f2061">It was like a moon, but an incandescent moon whose brilliancy was all the more intolerable as it cut sharply on the frightful darkness of space. </span>
      <span id="f2062">This mass, of a circular form, threw a light which filled the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f2063">The forms of Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan, bathed in its white sheets, assumed that livid spectral appearance which physicians produce with the fictitious light of alcohol impregnated with salt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2064">&#34;By Jove!&#34; cried Michel Ardan, &#34;we are hideous. </span>
      <span id="f2065">What is that ill-conditioned moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2066">&#34;A meteor,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2067">&#34;A meteor burning in space?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2068">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2069">This shooting globe suddenly appearing in shadow at a distance of at most 200 miles, ought, according to Barbicane, to have a diameter of 2000 yards. </span>
      <span id="f2070">It advanced at a speed of about one mile and a half per second. </span>
      <span id="f2071">It cut the projectile&#39;s path and must reach it in some minutes. </span>
      <span id="f2072">As it approached it grew to enormous proportions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2073">Imagine, if possible, the situation of the travellers! </span>
      <span id="f2074">It is impossible to describe it. </span>
      <span id="f2075">In spite of their courage, their _sang-froid_, their carelessness of danger, they were mute, motionless with stiffened limbs, a prey to frightful terror. </span>
      <span id="f2076">Their projectile, the course of which they could not alter, was rushing straight on this ignited mass, more intense than the open mouth of an oven. </span>
      <span id="f2077">It seemed as though they were being precipitated towards an abyss of fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2078">Barbicane had seized the hands of his two companions, and all three looked through their half-open eyelids upon that asteroid heated to a white heat. </span>
      <span id="f2079">If thought was not destroyed within them, if their brains still worked amidst all this awe, they must have given themselves up for lost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2080">Two minutes after the sudden appearance of the meteor (to them two centuries of anguish) the projectile seemed almost about to strike it, when the globe of fire burst like a bomb, but without making any noise in that void where sound, which is but the agitation of the layers of air, could not be generated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2081">Nicholl uttered a cry, and he and his companions rushed to the scuttle. </span>
      <span id="f2082">What a sight! </span>
      <span id="f2083">What pen can describe it? </span>
      <span id="f2084">What palette is rich enough in colours to reproduce so magnificent a spectacle?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2085">It was like the opening of a crater, like the scattering of an immense conflagration. </span>
      <span id="f2086">Thousands of luminous fragments lit up and irradiated space with their fires. </span>
      <span id="f2087">Every size, every colour, was there intermingled. </span>
      <span id="f2088">There were rays of yellow and pale yellow, red, green, grey—a crown of fireworks of all colours. </span>
      <span id="f2089">Of the enormous and much-dreaded globe there remained nothing but these fragments carried in all directions, now become asteroids in their turn, some flaming like a sword, some surrounded by a whitish cloud, and others leaving behind them trains of brilliant cosmical dust.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2090">These incandescent blocks crossed and struck each other, scattering still smaller fragments, some of which struck the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f2091">Its left scuttle was even cracked by a violent shock. </span>
      <span id="f2092">It seemed to be floating amidst a hail of howitzer shells, the smallest of which might destroy it instantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2093">The light which saturated the ether was so wonderfully intense, that Michel, drawing Barbicane and Nicholl to his window, exclaimed, &#34;The invisible moon, visible at last!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2094">And through a luminous emanation, which lasted some seconds, the whole three caught a glimpse of that mysterious disc which the eye of man now saw for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f2095">What could they distinguish at a distance which they could not estimate? </span>
      <span id="f2096">Some lengthened bands along the disc, real clouds formed in the midst of a very confined atmosphere, from which emerged not only all the mountains, but also projections of less importance; its circles, its yawning craters, as capriciously placed as on the visible surface. </span>
      <span id="f2097">Then immense spaces, no longer arid plains, but real seas, oceans, widely distributed, reflecting on their liquid surface all the dazzling magic of the fires of space; and, lastly, on the surface of the continents, large dark masses, looking like immense forests under the rapid illumination of a brilliance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2098">Was it an illusion, a mistake, an optical illusion? </span>
      <span id="f2099">Could they give a scientific assent to an observation so superficially obtained? </span>
      <span id="f2100">Dared they pronounce upon the question of its habitability after so slight a glimpse of the invisible disc?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2101">But the lightnings in space subsided by degrees; its accidental brilliancy died away; the asteroids dispersed in different directions and were extinguished in the distance. </span>
      <span id="f2102">The ether returned to its accustomed darkness; the stars, eclipsed for a moment, again twinkled in the firmament, and the disc, so hastily discerned, was again buried in impenetrable night.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>