<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2103">CHAPTER XVI.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2104">THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2105">The projectile had just escaped a terrible danger, and a very unforeseen one. </span>
      <span id="f2106">Who would have thought of such a rencontre with meteors? </span>
      <span id="f2107">These erring bodies might create serious perils for the travellers. </span>
      <span id="f2108">They were to them so many sandbanks upon that sea of ether which, less fortunate than sailors, they could not escape. </span>
      <span id="f2109">But did these adventurers complain of space? </span>
      <span id="f2110">No, not since nature had given them the splendid sight of a cosmical meteor bursting from expansion, since this inimitable firework, which no Ruggieri could imitate, had lit up for some seconds the invisible glory of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2111">In that flash, continents, seas, and forests had become visible to them. </span>
      <span id="f2112">Did an atmosphere, then, bring to this unknown face its life-giving atoms? </span>
      <span id="f2113">Questions still insoluble, and for ever closed against human curiosity!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2114">It was then half past three in the afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f2115">The projectile was following its curvilinear direction round the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2116">Had its course been again altered by the meteor? </span>
      <span id="f2117">It was to be feared so. </span>
      <span id="f2118">But the projectile must describe a curve unalterably determined by the laws of mechanical reasoning. </span>
      <span id="f2119">Barbicane was inclined to believe that this curve would be rather a parabola than a hyperbola. </span>
      <span id="f2120">But admitting the parabola, the projectile must quickly have passed through the cone of shadow projected into space opposite the sun. </span>
      <span id="f2121">This cone, indeed, is very narrow, the angular diameter of the moon being so little when compared with the diameter of the orb of day; and up to this time the projectile had been floating in this deep shadow. </span>
      <span id="f2122">Whatever had been its speed (and it could not have been insignificant) its period of occultation continued. </span>
      <span id="f2123">That was evident, but perhaps that would not have been the case in a supposed rigidly parabolical trajectory,—a new problem which tormented Barbicane&#39;s brain, imprisoned as he was in a circle of unknowns which he could not unravel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2124">Neither of the travellers thought of taking an instant&#39;s repose. </span>
      <span id="f2125">Each one watched for an unexpected fact, which might throw some new light on their uranographic studies. </span>
      <span id="f2126">About five o&#39;clock, Michel Ardan distributed, under the name of dinner, some pieces of bread and cold meat, which were quickly swallowed without either of them abandoning their scuttle, the glass of which was incessantly encrusted by the condensation of vapour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2127">About forty-five minutes past five in the evening, Nicholl, armed with his glass, sighted towards the southern border of the moon, and in the direction followed by the projectile, some bright points cut upon the dark shield of the sky. </span>
      <span id="f2128">They looked like a succession of sharp points lengthened into a tremulous line. </span>
      <span id="f2129">They were very bright. </span>
      <span id="f2130">Such appeared the terminal line of the moon when in one of her octants.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2131">They could not be mistaken. </span>
      <span id="f2132">It was no longer a simple meteor. </span>
      <span id="f2133">This luminous ridge had neither colour nor motion. </span>
      <span id="f2134">Nor was it a volcano in eruption. </span>
      <span id="f2135">And Barbicane did not hesitate to pronounce upon it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2136">&#34;The sun!&#34; he exclaimed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2137">&#34;What! </span>
      <span id="f2138">the sun?&#34; answered Nicholl and Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2139">&#34;Yes, my friends, it is the radiant orb itself lighting up the summit of the mountains situated on the southern borders of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2140">We are evidently nearing the south pole.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2141">&#34;After having passed the north pole,&#34; replied Michel. </span>
      <span id="f2142">&#34;We have made the circuit of our satellite, then?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2143">&#34;Yes, my good Michel.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2144">&#34;Then, no more hyperbolas, no more parabolas, no more open curves to fear?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2145">&#34;No, but a _closed_ curve.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2146">&#34;Which is called—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2147">&#34;An ellipse. </span>
      <span id="f2148">Instead of losing itself in interplanetary space, it is probable that the projectile will describe an elliptical orbit around the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2149">&#34;Indeed!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2150">&#34;And that it will become _her_ satellite.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2151">&#34;Moon of the moon!&#34; cried Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2152">&#34;Only, I would have you observe, my worthy friend,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;that we are none the less lost for that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2153">&#34;Yes, in another manner, and much more pleasantly,&#34; answered the careless Frenchman with his most amiable smile.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>