<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2154">CHAPTER XVII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2155">TYCHO.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2156">At six in the evening the projectile passed the south pole at less than forty miles off, a distance equal to that already reached at the north pole. </span>
      <span id="f2157">The elliptical curve was being rigidly carried out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2158">At this moment the travellers once more entered the blessed rays of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f2159">They saw once more those stars which move slowly from east to west. </span>
      <span id="f2160">The radiant orb was saluted by a triple hurrah. </span>
      <span id="f2161">With its light it also sent heat, which soon pierced the metal walls. </span>
      <span id="f2162">The glass resumed its accustomed appearance. </span>
      <span id="f2163">The layers of ice melted as if by enchantment; and immediately, for economy&#39;s sake, the gas was put out, the air apparatus alone consuming its usual quantity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2164">&#34;Ah!&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;these rays of heat are good. </span>
      <span id="f2165">With what impatience must the Selenites wait the reappearance of the orb of day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2166">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Michel Ardan, &#34;imbibing as it were the brilliant ether, light and heat, all life is contained in them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2167">At this moment the bottom of the projectile deviated somewhat from the lunar surface, in order to follow the slightly lengthened elliptical orbit. </span>
      <span id="f2168">From this point, had the earth been at the full, Barbicane and his companions could have seen it, but immersed in the sun&#39;s irradiation she was quite invisible. </span>
      <span id="f2169">Another spectacle attracted their attention, that of the southern part of the moon, brought by the glasses to within 450 yards. </span>
      <span id="f2170">They did not again leave the scuttles, and noted every detail of this fantastical continent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2171">Mounts Doerfel and Leibnitz formed two separate groups very near the south pole. </span>
      <span id="f2172">The first group extended from the pole to the eighty-fourth parallel, on the eastern part of the orb; the second occupied the eastern border, extending from the 65° of latitude to the pole.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2173">On their capriciously formed ridge appeared dazzling sheets, as mentioned by Pere Secchi. </span>
      <span id="f2174">With more certainty than the illustrious Roman astronomer, Barbicane was enabled to recognize their nature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2175">&#34;They are snow,&#34; he exclaimed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2176">&#34;Snow?&#34; repeated Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2177">&#34;Yes, Nicholl, snow; the surface of which is deeply frozen. </span>
      <span id="f2178">See how they reflect the luminous rays. </span>
      <span id="f2179">Cooled lava would never give out such intense reflection. </span>
      <span id="f2180">There must then be water, there must be air on the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2181">As little as you please, but the fact can no longer be contested.&#34; No, it could not be. </span>
      <span id="f2182">And if ever Barbicane should see the earth again, his notes will bear witness to this great fact in his selenographic observations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2183">These mountains of Doerfel and Leibnitz rose in the midst of plains of a medium extent, which were bounded by an indefinite succession of circles and annular ramparts. </span>
      <span id="f2184">These two chains are the only ones met with in this region of circles. </span>
      <span id="f2185">Comparatively but slightly marked, they throw up here and there some sharp points, the highest summit of which attains an altitude of 24,600 feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2186">But the projectile was high above all this landscape, and the projections disappeared in the intense brilliancy of the disc. </span>
      <span id="f2187">And to the eyes of the travellers there reappeared that original aspect of the lunar landscapes, raw in tone, without gradation of colours, and without degrees of shadow, roughly black and white, from the want of diffusion of light.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2188">But the sight of this desolate world did not fail to captivate them by its very strangeness. </span>
      <span id="f2189">They were moving over this region as if they had been borne on the breath of some storm, watching heights defile under their feet, piercing the cavities with their eyes, going down into the rifts, climbing the ramparts, sounding these mysterious holes, and levelling all cracks. </span>
      <span id="f2190">But no trace of vegetation, no appearance of cities; nothing but stratification, beds of lava, overflowings polished like immense mirrors, reflecting the sun&#39;s rays with overpowering brilliancy. </span>
      <span id="f2191">Nothing belonging to a _living_ world—everything to a dead world, where avalanches, rolling from the summits of the mountains, would disperse noiselessly at the bottom of the abyss, retaining the motion, but wanting the sound. </span>
      <span id="f2192">In any case it was the image of death, without its being possible even to say that life had ever existed there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2193">Michel Ardan, however, thought he recognized a heap of ruins, to which he drew Barbicane&#39;s attention. </span>
      <span id="f2194">It was about the 80th parallel, in 30° longitude. </span>
      <span id="f2195">This heap of stones, rather regularly placed, represented a vast fortress, overlooking a long rift, which in former days had served as a bed to the rivers of prehistorical times. </span>
      <span id="f2196">Not far from that, rose to a height of 17,400 feet the annular mountain of Short, equal to the Asiatic Caucasus. </span>
      <span id="f2197">Michel Ardan, with his accustomed ardour, maintained &#34;the evidences&#34; of his fortress. </span>
      <span id="f2198">Beneath it he discerned the dismantled ramparts of a town; here the still intact arch of a portico, there two or three columns lying under their base; farther on, a succession of arches which must have supported the conduit of an aqueduct; in another part the sunken pillars of a gigantic bridge, run into the thickest parts of the rift. </span>
      <span id="f2199">He distinguished all this, but with so much imagination in his glance, and through glasses so fantastical, that we must mistrust his observation. </span>
      <span id="f2200">But who could affirm, who would dare to say, that the amiable fellow did not really see that which his two companions would not see?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2201">Moments were too precious to be sacrificed in idle discussion. </span>
      <span id="f2202">The Selenite city, whether imaginary or not, had already disappeared afar off. </span>
      <span id="f2203">The distance of the projectile from the lunar disc was on the increase, and the details of the soil were being lost in a confused jumble. </span>
      <span id="f2204">The reliefs, the circles, the craters and plains alone remained, and still showed their boundary lines distinctly. </span>
      <span id="f2205">At this moment, to the left, lay extended one of the finest circles of lunar orography, one of the curiosities of this continent. </span>
      <span id="f2206">It was Newton, which Barbicane recognized without trouble, by referring to the _Mappa Selenographica_.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2207">Newton is situated in exactly 77° south lat., and 16° east long. </span>
      <span id="f2208">It forms an annular crater, the ramparts of which, rising to a height of 21,300 feet, seemed to be impassable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2209">Barbicane made his companions observe that the height of this mountain above the surrounding plain was far from equalling the depth of its crater. </span>
      <span id="f2210">This enormous hole was beyond all measurement, and formed a gloomy abyss, the bottom of which the sun&#39;s rays could never reach. </span>
      <span id="f2211">There, according to Humboldt, reigns utter darkness, which the light of the sun and the earth cannot break. </span>
      <span id="f2212">Mythologists could well have made it the mouth of hell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2213">&#34;Newton,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;is the most perfect type of these annular mountains, of which the earth possesses no sample. </span>
      <span id="f2214">They prove that the moon&#39;s formation, by means of cooling, is due to violent causes; for whilst under the pressure of internal fires the reliefs rise to considerable height, the depths withdraw far below the lunar level.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2215">&#34;I do not dispute the fact,&#34; replied Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2216">Some minutes after passing Newton, the projectile directly overlooked the annular mountain of Moret. </span>
      <span id="f2217">It skirted at some distance the summits of Blancanus, and at about half-past seven in the evening reached the circle of Clavius.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2218">This circle, one of the most remarkable of the disc, is situated in 58° south lat., and 15° east long. </span>
      <span id="f2219">Its height is estimated at 22,950 feet. </span>
      <span id="f2220">The travellers, at a distance of twenty-four miles (reduced to four by their glasses), could admire this vast crater in its entirety.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2221">&#34;Terrestrial volcanoes,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;are but molehills compared with those of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2222">Measuring the old craters formed by the first eruptions of Vesuvius and Etna, we find them little more than three miles in breadth. </span>
      <span id="f2223">In France the circle of Cantal measures six miles across; at Ceyland the circle of the island is forty miles, which is considered the largest on the globe. </span>
      <span id="f2224">What are these diameters against that of Clavius, which we overlook at this moment?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2225">&#34;What is its breadth?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2226">&#34;It is 150 miles,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2227">&#34;This circle is certainly the most important on the moon, but many others measure 150, 100, or 75 miles.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2228">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2229">my friends,&#34; exclaimed Michel, &#34;can you picture to yourselves what this now peaceful orb of night must have been when its craters, filled with thunderings, vomited at the same time smoke and tongues of flame. </span>
      <span id="f2230">What a wonderful spectacle then, and now what decay! </span>
      <span id="f2231">This moon is nothing more than a thin carcase of fireworks, whose squibs, rockets, serpents and suns, after a superb brilliancy, have left but sadly broken cases. </span>
      <span id="f2232">Who can say the cause, the reason, the motive force of these cataclysms?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2233">Barbicane was not listening to Michel Ardan; he was contemplating those ramparts of Clavius, formed by large mountains spread over several miles. </span>
      <span id="f2234">At the bottom of the immense cavity burrowed hundreds of small extinguished craters, riddling the soil like a colander, and overlooked by a peak 15,000 feet high.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2235">Around the plain appeared desolate. </span>
      <span id="f2236">Nothing so arid as these reliefs, nothing so sad as these ruins of mountains, and (if we may so express ourselves) these fragments of peaks and mountains which strewed the soil. </span>
      <span id="f2237">The satellite seemed to have burst at this spot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2238">The projectile was still advancing, and this movement did not subside. </span>
      <span id="f2239">Circles, craters, and uprooted mountains succeeded each other incessantly. </span>
      <span id="f2240">No more plains; no more seas. </span>
      <span id="f2241">A never-ending Switzerland and Norway. </span>
      <span id="f2242">And lastly, in the centre of this region of crevasses, the most splendid mountain on the lunar disc, the dazzling Tycho, in which posterity will ever preserve the name of the illustrious Danish astronomer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2243">In observing the full moon in a cloudless sky no one has failed to remark this brilliant point of the southern hemisphere. </span>
      <span id="f2244">Michel Ardan used every metaphor that his imagination could supply to designate it by. </span>
      <span id="f2245">To him this Tycho was a focus of light, a centre of irradiation, a crater vomiting rays. </span>
      <span id="f2246">It was the tire of a brilliant wheel, an _asteria_ enclosing the disc with its silver tentacles, an enormous eye filled with flames, a glory carved for Pluto&#39;s head, a star launched by the Creator&#39;s hand, and crushed against the face of the moon!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2247">Tycho forms such a concentration of light that the inhabitants of the earth can see it without glasses, though at a distance of 240,000 miles! </span>
      <span id="f2248">Imagine, then, its intensity to the eye of observers placed at a distance of only fifty miles! </span>
      <span id="f2249">Seen through this pure ether, its brilliancy was so intolerable that Barbicane and his friends were obliged to blacken their glasses with the gas smoke before they could bear the splendour. </span>
      <span id="f2250">Then silent, scarcely uttering an interjection of admiration, they gazed, they contemplated. </span>
      <span id="f2251">All their feelings, all their impressions, were concentrated in that look, as under any violent emotion all life is concentrated at the heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2252">Tycho belongs to the system of radiating mountains, like Aristarchus and Copernicus; but it is of all the most complete and decided, showing unquestionably the frightful volcanic action to which the formation of the moon is due. </span>
      <span id="f2253">Tycho is situated in 43° south lat., and 12° east long. </span>
      <span id="f2254">Its centre is occupied by a crater fifty miles broad. </span>
      <span id="f2255">It assumes a slightly elliptical form, and is surrounded by an enclosure of annular ramparts, which on the east and west overlook the outer plain from a height of 15,000 feet. </span>
      <span id="f2256">It is a group of Mont Blancs, placed round one common centre and crowned by radiating beams.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2257">What this incomparable mountain really is, with all the projections converging towards it, and the interior excrescences of its crater, photography itself could never represent. </span>
      <span id="f2258">Indeed, it is during the full moon that Tycho is seen in all its splendour. </span>
      <span id="f2259">Then all shadows disappear, the foreshortening of perspective disappears, and all proofs become white—a disagreeable fact; for this strange region would have been marvellous if reproduced with photographic exactness. </span>
      <span id="f2260">It is but a group of hollows, craters, circles, a network of crests; then, as far as the eye could see, a whole volcanic network cast upon this encrusted soil. </span>
      <span id="f2261">One can then understand that the bubbles of this central eruption have kept their first form. </span>
      <span id="f2262">Crystallized by cooling, they have stereotyped that aspect which the moon formerly presented when under the Plutonian forces.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2263">The distance which separated the travellers from the annular summits of Tycho was not so great but that they could catch the principal details. </span>
      <span id="f2264">Even on the causeway forming the fortifications of Tycho, the mountains hanging on to the interior and exterior sloping flanks rose in stories like gigantic terraces. </span>
      <span id="f2265">They appeared to be higher by 300 or 400 feet to the west than to the east. </span>
      <span id="f2266">No system of terrestrial encampment could equal these natural fortifications. </span>
      <span id="f2267">A town built at the bottom of this circular cavity would have been utterly inaccessible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2268">Inaccessible and wonderfully extended over this soil covered with picturesque projections! </span>
      <span id="f2269">Indeed, nature had not left the bottom of this crater flat and empty. </span>
      <span id="f2270">It possessed its own peculiar orography, a mountainous system, making it a world in itself. </span>
      <span id="f2271">The travellers could distinguish clearly cones, central hills, remarkable positions of the soil, naturally placed to receive the chefs-d&#39;œuvre of Selenite architecture. </span>
      <span id="f2272">There was marked out the place for a temple, here the ground of a forum, on this spot the plan of a palace, in another the plateau for a citadel; the whole overlooked by a central mountain of 1500 feet. </span>
      <span id="f2273">A vast circle, in which ancient Rome could have been held in its entirety ten times over.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2274">&#34;Ah!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, enthusiastic at the sight; &#34;what a grand town might be constructed within that ring of mountains! </span>
      <span id="f2275">A quiet city, a peaceful refuge, beyond all human misery. </span>
      <span id="f2276">How calm and isolated those misanthropes, those haters of humanity might live there, and all who have a distaste for social life!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2277">&#34;All! </span>
      <span id="f2278">It would be too small for them,&#34; replied Barbicane simply.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>