<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2279">CHAPTER XVIII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2280">GRAVE QUESTIONS.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2281">But the projectile had passed the enceinte of Tycho, and Barbicane and his two companions watched with scrupulous attention the brilliant rays which the celebrated mountain shed so curiously all over the horizon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2282">What was this radiant glory? </span>
      <span id="f2283">What geological phenomenon had designed these ardent beams? </span>
      <span id="f2284">This question occupied Barbicane&#39;s mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2285">Under his eyes ran in all directions luminous furrows, raised at the edges and concave in the centre, some twelve miles, others thirty miles broad. </span>
      <span id="f2286">These brilliant trains extended in some places to within 600 miles of Tycho, and seemed to cover, particularly towards the east, the northeast and the north, the half of the southern hemisphere. </span>
      <span id="f2287">One of these jets extended as far as the circle of Neander, situated on the 40th meridian. </span>
      <span id="f2288">Another by a slight curve furrowed the Sea of Nectar, breaking against the chain of Pyrenees, after a circuit of 800 miles. </span>
      <span id="f2289">Others, towards the west, covered the Sea of Clouds and the Sea of Humours with a luminous network. </span>
      <span id="f2290">What was the origin of these sparkling rays, which shone on the plains as well as on the reliefs, at whatever height they might be? </span>
      <span id="f2291">All started from a common centre, the crater of Tycho. </span>
      <span id="f2292">They sprang from him. </span>
      <span id="f2293">Herschel attributed their brilliancy to currents of lava congealed by the cold; an opinion, however, which has not been generally adopted. </span>
      <span id="f2294">Other astronomers have seen in these inexplicable rays a kind of _moraines_, rows of erratic blocks, which had been thrown up at the period of Tycho&#39;s formation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2295">&#34;And why not?&#34; asked Nicholl of Barbicane, who was relating and rejecting these different opinions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2296">&#34;Because the regularity of these luminous lines, and the violence necessary to carry volcanic matter to such distances, is inexplicable.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2297">&#34;Eh! </span>
      <span id="f2298">by Jove!&#34; replied Michel Ardan, &#34;it seems easy enough to me to explain the origin of these rays.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2299">&#34;Indeed?&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2300">&#34;Indeed,&#34; continued Michel. </span>
      <span id="f2301">&#34;It is enough to say that it is a vast star, similar to that produced by a ball or a stone thrown at a square of glass!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2302">&#34;Well!&#34; replied Barbicane, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f2303">&#34;And what hand would be powerful enough to throw a ball to give such a shock as that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2304">&#34;The hand is not necessary,&#34; answered Nicholl, not at all confounded; &#34;and as to the stone, let us suppose it to be a comet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2305">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2306">those much-abused comets!&#34; exclaimed Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2307">&#34;My brave Michel, your explanation is not bad; but your comet is useless. </span>
      <span id="f2308">The shock which produced that rent must have come from the inside of the star. </span>
      <span id="f2309">A violent contraction of the lunar crust, while cooling, might suffice to imprint this gigantic star.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2310">&#34;A contraction! </span>
      <span id="f2311">something like a lunar stomach-ache,&#34; said Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2312">&#34;Besides,&#34; added Barbicane, &#34;this opinion is that of an English savant, Nasmyth, and it seems to me to sufficiently explain the radiation of these mountains.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2313">&#34;That Nasmyth was no fool!&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2314">Long did the travellers, whom such a sight could never weary, admire the splendours of Tycho. </span>
      <span id="f2315">Their projectile, saturated with luminous gleams in the double irradiation of sun and moon, must have appeared like an incandescent globe. </span>
      <span id="f2316">They had passed suddenly from excessive cold to intense heat. </span>
      <span id="f2317">Nature was thus preparing them to become Selenites. </span>
      <span id="f2318">Become Selenites! </span>
      <span id="f2319">That idea brought up once more the question of the habitability of the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2320">After what they had seen, could the travellers solve it? </span>
      <span id="f2321">Would they decide for or against it? </span>
      <span id="f2322">Michel Ardan persuaded his two friends to form an opinion, and asked them directly if they thought that men and animals were represented in the lunar world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2323">&#34;I think that we can answer,&#34; said Barbicane; &#34;but according to my idea the question ought not to be put in that form. </span>
      <span id="f2324">I ask it to be put differently.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2325">&#34;Put it your own way,&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2326">&#34;Here it is,&#34; continued Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2327">&#34;The problem is a double one, and requires a double solution. </span>
      <span id="f2328">Is the moon _habitable?_ Has the moon ever been _inhabitable?_&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2329">&#34;Good!&#34; replied Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f2330">&#34;First let us see whether the moon is habitable.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2331">&#34;To tell the truth, I know nothing about it,&#34; answered Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2332">&#34;And I answer in the negative,&#34; continued Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2333">&#34;In her actual state, with her surrounding atmosphere certainly very much reduced, her seas for the most part dried up, her insufficient supply of water restricted, vegetation, sudden alterations of cold and heat, her days and nights of 354 hours; the moon does not seem habitable to me, nor does she seem propitious to animal development, nor sufficient for the wants of existence as we understand it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2334">&#34;Agreed,&#34; replied Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f2335">&#34;But is not the moon habitable for creatures differently organized from ourselves?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2336">&#34;That question is more difficult to answer, but I will try; and I ask Nicholl if _motion_ appears to him to be a necessary result of _life_, whatever be its organization?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2337">&#34;Without a doubt!&#34; answered Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2338">&#34;Then, my worthy companion, I would answer that we have observed the lunar continent at a distance of 500 yards at most, and that nothing seemed to us to move on the moon&#39;s surface. </span>
      <span id="f2339">The presence of any kind of life would have been betrayed by its attendant marks, such as divers buildings, and even by ruins. </span>
      <span id="f2340">And what have we seen? </span>
      <span id="f2341">Everywhere and always the geological works of nature, never the work of man. </span>
      <span id="f2342">If, then, there exist representatives of the animal kingdom on the moon, they must have fled to those unfathomable cavities which the eye cannot reach; which I cannot admit, for they must have left traces of their passage on those plains which the atmosphere must cover, however slightly raised it may be. </span>
      <span id="f2343">These traces are nowhere visible. </span>
      <span id="f2344">There remains but one hypothesis, that of a living race to which motion, which is life, is foreign.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2345">&#34;One might as well say, living creatures which do not live,&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2346">&#34;Just so,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;which for us has no meaning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2347">&#34;Then we may form our opinion?&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2348">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2349">&#34;Very well,&#34; continued Michel Ardan, &#34;the Scientific Commission assembled in the projectile of the Gun Club, after having founded their argument on facts recently observed, decide unanimously upon the question of the habitability of the moon—_&#39;No!_ the moon is not habitable.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2350">This decision was consigned by President Barbicane to his notebook, where the process of the sitting of the 6th of December may be seen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2351">&#34;Now,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;let us attack the second question, an indispensable complement of the first. </span>
      <span id="f2352">I ask the honourable Commission, if the moon is not habitable, has she ever been inhabited, Citizen Barbicane?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2353">&#34;My friends,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;I did not undertake this journey in order to form an opinion on the past habitability of our satellite; but I will add that our personal observations only confirm me in this opinion. </span>
      <span id="f2354">I believe, indeed I affirm, that the moon has been inhabited by a human race organized like our own; that she has produced animals anatomically formed like the terrestrial animals; but I add that these races, human or animal, have had their day, and are now for ever extinct!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2355">&#34;Then,&#34; asked Michel, &#34;the moon must be older than the earth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2356">&#34;No!&#34; said Barbicane decidedly, &#34;but a world which has grown old quicker, and whose formation and deformation have been more rapid. </span>
      <span id="f2357">Relatively, the organizing force of matter has been much more violent in the interior of the moon than in the interior of the terrestrial globe. </span>
      <span id="f2358">The actual state of this cracked twisted, and burst disc abundantly proves this. </span>
      <span id="f2359">The moon and the earth were nothing but gaseous masses originally. </span>
      <span id="f2360">These gases have passed into a liquid state under different influences, and the solid masses have been formed later. </span>
      <span id="f2361">But most certainly our sphere was still gaseous or liquid, when the moon was solidified by cooling, and had become habitable.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2362">&#34;I believe it,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2363">&#34;Then,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;an atmosphere surrounded it, the waters contained within this gaseous envelope could not evaporate. </span>
      <span id="f2364">Under the influence of air, water, light, solar heat, and central heat, vegetation took possession of the continents prepared to receive it, and certainly life showed itself about this period, for nature does not expend herself in vain; and a world so wonderfully formed for habitation must necessarily be inhabited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2365">&#34;But,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;many phenomena inherent in our satellite might cramp the expansion of the animal and vegetable kingdom. </span>
      <span id="f2366">For example, its days and nights of 354 hours?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2367">&#34;At the terrestrial poles they last six months,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2368">&#34;An argument of little value, since the poles are not inhabited.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2369">&#34;Let us observe, my friends,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;that if in the actual state of the moon its long nights and long days created differences of temperature insupportable to organization, it was not so at the historical period of time. </span>
      <span id="f2370">The atmosphere enveloped the disc with a fluid mantle; vapour deposited itself in the shape of clouds; this natural screen tempered the ardour of the solar rays, and retained the nocturnal radiation. </span>
      <span id="f2371">Light, like heat, can diffuse itself in the air; hence an equality between the influences which no longer exists, now that that atmosphere has almost entirely disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f2372">And now I am going to astonish you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2373">&#34;Astonish us?&#34; said Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2374">&#34;I firmly believe that at the period when the moon was inhabited, the nights and days did not last 354 hours!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2375">&#34;And why?&#34; asked Nicholl quickly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2376">&#34;Because most probably then the rotary motion of the moon upon her axis was not equal to her revolution, an equality which presents each part of her disc during fifteen days to the action of the solar rays.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2377">&#34;Granted,&#34; replied Nicholl, &#34;but why should not these two motions have been equal, as they are really so?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2378">&#34;Because that equality has only been determined by terrestrial attraction. </span>
      <span id="f2379">And who can say that this attraction was powerful enough to alter the motion of the moon at that period when the earth was still fluid?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2380">&#34;Just so,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;and who can say that the moon has always been a satellite of the earth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2381">&#34;And who can say,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;that the moon did not exist before the earth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2382">Their imaginations carried them away into an indefinite field of hypothesis. </span>
      <span id="f2383">Barbicane sought to restrain them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2384">&#34;Those speculations are too high,&#34; said he; &#34;problems utterly insoluble. </span>
      <span id="f2385">Do not let us enter upon them. </span>
      <span id="f2386">Let us only admit the insufficiency of the primordial attraction; and then by the inequality of the two motions of rotation and revolution, the days and nights could have succeeded each other on the moon as they succeed each other on the earth. </span>
      <span id="f2387">Besides, even without these conditions, life was possible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2388">&#34;And so,&#34; asked Michel Ardan, &#34;humanity has disappeared from the moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2389">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;after having doubtless remained persistently for millions of centuries; by degrees the atmosphere becoming rarefied, the disc became uninhabitable, as the terrestrial globe will one day become by cooling.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2390">&#34;By cooling?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2391">&#34;Certainly,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;as the internal fires became extinguished, and the incandescent matter concentrated itself, the lunar crust cooled. </span>
      <span id="f2392">By degrees the consequences of these phenomena showed themselves in the disappearance of organized beings, and by the disappearance of vegetation. </span>
      <span id="f2393">Soon the atmosphere was rarefied, probably withdrawn by terrestrial attraction; then aerial departure of respirable air, and disappearance of water by means of evaporation. </span>
      <span id="f2394">At this period the moon becoming uninhabitable, was no longer inhabited. </span>
      <span id="f2395">It was a dead world, such as we see it to-day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2396">&#34;And you say that the same fate is in store for the earth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2397">&#34;Most probably.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2398">&#34;But when?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2399">&#34;When the cooling of its crust shall have made it uninhabitable.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2400">&#34;And have they calculated the time which our unfortunate sphere will take to cool?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2401">&#34;Certainly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2402">&#34;And you know these calculations?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2403">&#34;Perfectly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2404">&#34;But speak, then, my clumsy savant,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;for you make me boil with impatience!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2405">&#34;Very well, my good Michel,&#34; replied Barbicane quietly, &#34;we know what diminution of temperature the earth undergoes in the lapse of a century. </span>
      <span id="f2406">And according to certain calculations, this mean temperature will, after a period of 400,000 years, be brought down to zero!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2407">&#34;Four hundred thousand years!&#34; exclaimed Michel. </span>
      <span id="f2408">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2409">I breathe again. </span>
      <span id="f2410">Really I was frightened to hear you; I imagined that we had not more than 50,000 years to live.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2411">Barbicane and Nicholl could not help laughing at their companion&#39;s uneasiness. </span>
      <span id="f2412">Then Nicholl, who wished to end the discussion, put the second question, which had just been considered again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2413">&#34;Has the moon been inhabited?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2414">The answer was unanimously in the affirmative. </span>
      <span id="f2415">But during this discussion, fruitful in somewhat hazardous theories, the projectile was rapidly leaving the moon; the lineaments faded away from the travellers&#39; eyes, mountains were confused in the distance; and of all the wonderful, strange, and fantastical form of the earth&#39;s satellite, there soon remained nothing but the imperishable remembrance.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>