<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2416">CHAPTER XIX.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2417">A STRUGGLE AGAINST THE IMPOSSIBLE.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2418">For a long time Barbicane and his companions looked silently and sadly upon that world which they had only seen from a distance, as Moses saw the land of Canaan, and which they were leaving without a possibility of ever returning to it. </span>
      <span id="f2419">The projectile&#39;s position with regard to the moon had altered, and the base was now turned to the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2420">This change, which Barbicane verified, did not fail to surprise them. </span>
      <span id="f2421">If the projectile was to gravitate round the satellite in an elliptical orbit, why was not its heaviest part turned towards it, as the moon turns hers to the earth? </span>
      <span id="f2422">That was a difficult point.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2423">In watching the course of the projectile they could see that on leaving the moon it followed a course analogous to that traced in approaching her. </span>
      <span id="f2424">It was describing a very long ellipse, which would most likely extend to the point of equal attraction, where the influences of the earth and its satellite are neutralized.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2425">Such was the conclusion which Barbicane very justly drew from facts already observed, a conviction which his two friends shared with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2426">&#34;And when arrived at this dead point, what will become of us?&#34; asked Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2427">&#34;We don&#39;t know,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2428">&#34;But one can draw some hypotheses, I suppose?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2429">&#34;Two,&#34; answered Barbicane; &#34;either the projectile&#39;s speed will be insufficient, and it will remain for immovable on this line of double attraction—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2430">&#34;I prefer the other hypothesis, whatever it may be,&#34; interrupted Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2431">&#34;Or,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;its speed will be sufficient, and it will continue its elliptical course, to gravitate for ever around the orb of night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2432">&#34;A revolution not at all consoling,&#34; said Michel, &#34;to pass to the state of humble servants to a moon whom we are accustomed to look upon as our own handmaid. </span>
      <span id="f2433">So that is the fate in store for us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2434">Neither Barbicane nor Nicholl answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2435">&#34;You do not answer,&#34; continued Michel impatiently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2436">&#34;There is nothing to answer,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2437">&#34;Is there nothing to try?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2438">&#34;No,&#34; answered Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2439">&#34;Do you pretend to fight against the impossible?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2440">&#34;Why not? </span>
      <span id="f2441">Do one Frenchman and two Americans shrink from such a word?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2442">&#34;But what would you do?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2443">&#34;Subdue this motion which is bearing us away.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2444">&#34;Subdue it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2445">&#34;Yes,&#34; continued Michel, getting animated, &#34;or else alter it, and employ it to the accomplishment of our own ends.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2446">&#34;And how?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2447">&#34;That is your affair. </span>
      <span id="f2448">If artillerymen are not masters of their projectile they are not artillerymen. </span>
      <span id="f2449">If the projectile is to command the gunner, we had better ram the gunner into the gun. </span>
      <span id="f2450">My faith! </span>
      <span id="f2451">fine savants! </span>
      <span id="f2452">who do not know what is to become of us after inducing me—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2453">&#34;Inducing you!&#34; cried Barbicane and Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f2454">&#34;Inducing you! </span>
      <span id="f2455">What do you mean by that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2456">&#34;No recrimination,&#34; said Michel. </span>
      <span id="f2457">&#34;I do not complain; the trip has pleased me, the projectile agrees with me; but let us do all that is humanly possible to do to fall somewhere, even if only on the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2458">&#34;We ask no better, my worthy Michel,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;but means fail us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2459">&#34;We cannot alter the motion of the projectile?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2460">&#34;No.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2461">&#34;Nor diminish its speed?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2462">&#34;No.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2463">&#34;Not even by lightening it, as they lighten an overloaded vessel?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2464">&#34;What would you throw out?&#34; said Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f2465">&#34;We have no ballast on board; and indeed it seems to me that if lightened it would go much quicker.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2466">&#34;Slower.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2467">&#34;Quicker.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2468">&#34;Neither slower nor quicker,&#34; said Barbicane, wishing to make his two friends agree; &#34;for we float in space, and must no longer consider specific weight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2469">&#34;Very well,&#34; cried Michel Ardan in a decided voice; &#34;then there remains but one thing to do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2470">&#34;What is it?&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2471">&#34;Breakfast,&#34; answered the cool, audacious Frenchman, who always brought up this solution at the most difficult juncture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2472">In any case, if this operation had no influence on the projectile&#39;s course, it could at least be tried without inconvenience, and even with success from a stomachic point of view. </span>
      <span id="f2473">Certainly Michel had none but good ideas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2474">They breakfasted then at two in the morning; the hour mattered little. </span>
      <span id="f2475">Michel served his usual repast, crowned by a glorious bottle drawn from his private cellar. </span>
      <span id="f2476">If ideas did not crowd on their brains, we must despair of the Chambertin of 1853. </span>
      <span id="f2477">The repast finished, observations began again. </span>
      <span id="f2478">Around the projectile, at an invariable distance, were the objects which had been thrown out. </span>
      <span id="f2479">Evidently, in its translatory motion round the moon, it had not passed through any atmosphere, for the specific weight of these different objects would have checked their relative speed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2480">On the side of the terrestrial sphere nothing was to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f2481">The earth was but a day old, having been new the night before at twelve; and two days must elapse before its crescent, freed from the solar rays, would serve as a clock to the Selenites, as in its rotary movement each of its points after twenty-four hours repasses the same lunar meridian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2482">On the moon&#39;s side the sight was different; the orb shone in all her splendour amidst innumerable constellations, whose purity could not be troubled by her rays. </span>
      <span id="f2483">On the disc, the plains were already returning to the dark tint which is seen from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f2484">The other part of the nimbus remained brilliant, and in the midst of this general brilliancy Tycho shone prominently like a sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2485">Barbicane had no means of estimating the projectile&#39;s speed, but reasoning showed that it must uniformly decrease, according to the laws of mechanical reasoning. </span>
      <span id="f2486">Having admitted that the projectile was describing an orbit round the moon, this orbit must necessarily be elliptical; science proves that it must be so. </span>
      <span id="f2487">No motive body circulating round an attracting body fails in this law. </span>
      <span id="f2488">Every orbit described in space is elliptical. </span>
      <span id="f2489">And why should the projectile of the Gun Club escape this natural arrangement? </span>
      <span id="f2490">In elliptical orbits, the attracting body always occupies one of the foci; so that at one moment the satellite is nearer, and at another farther from the orb around which it gravitates. </span>
      <span id="f2491">When the earth is nearest the sun she is in her perihelion; and in her aphelion at the farthest point. </span>
      <span id="f2492">Speaking of the moon, she is nearest to the earth in her perigee, and farthest from it in her apogee. </span>
      <span id="f2493">To use analogous expressions, with which the astronomers&#39; language is enriched, if the projectile remains as a satellite of the moon, we must say that it is in its &#34;aposelene&#34; at its farthest point, and in its &#34;periselene&#34; at its nearest. </span>
      <span id="f2494">In the latter case, the projectile would attain its maximum of speed; and in the former its minimum. </span>
      <span id="f2495">It was evidently moving towards its aposelenitical point; and Barbicane had reason to think that its speed would decrease up to this point, and then increase by degrees as it neared the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2496">This speed would even become _nil_, if this point joined that of equal attraction. </span>
      <span id="f2497">Barbicane studied the consequences of these different situations, and thinking what inference he could draw from them, when he was roughly disturbed by a cry from Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2498">&#34;By Jove!&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;I must admit we are downright simpletons!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2499">&#34;I do not say we are not,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;but why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2500">&#34;Because we have a very simple means of checking this speed which is bearing us from the moon, and we do not use it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2501">&#34;And what is the means?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2502">&#34;To use the recoil contained in our rockets.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2503">&#34;Done!&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2504">&#34;We have not used this force yet,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;it is true, but we will do so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2505">&#34;When?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2506">&#34;When the time comes. </span>
      <span id="f2507">Observe, my friends, that in the position occupied by the projectile, an oblique position with regard to the lunar disc, our rockets, in slightly altering its direction, might turn it from the moon instead of drawing it nearer?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2508">&#34;Just so,&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2509">&#34;Let us wait, then. </span>
      <span id="f2510">By some inexplicable influence, the projectile is turning its base towards the earth. </span>
      <span id="f2511">It is probable that at the point of equal attraction, its conical cap will be directed rigidly towards the moon; at that moment we may hope that its speed will be _nil_; then will be the moment to act, and with the influence of our rockets we may perhaps provoke a fall directly on the surface of the lunar disc.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2512">&#34;Bravo!&#34; said Michel. </span>
      <span id="f2513">&#34;What we did not do, what we could not do on our first passage at the dead point, because the projectile was then endowed with too great a speed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2514">&#34;Very well reasoned,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2515">&#34;Let us wait patiently,&#34; continued Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2516">&#34;Putting every chance on our side, and after having so much despaired, I may say I think that we shall gain our end.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2517">This conclusion was a signal for Michel Ardan&#39;s hips and hurrahs. </span>
      <span id="f2518">And none of the audacious boobies remembered the question that they themselves had solved in the negative. </span>
      <span id="f2519">No! </span>
      <span id="f2520">the moon is not inhabited; no! </span>
      <span id="f2521">the moon is probably not habitable. </span>
      <span id="f2522">And yet they were going to try every thing to reach her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2523">One single question remained to be solved. </span>
      <span id="f2524">At what precise moment the projectile would reach the point of equal attraction, on which the travellers must play their last card. </span>
      <span id="f2525">In order to calculate this to within a few seconds, Barbicane had only to refer to his notes, and to reckon the different heights taken on the lunar parallels. </span>
      <span id="f2526">Thus the time necessary to travel over the distance between the dead point and the south pole would be equal to the distance separating the north pole from the dead point. </span>
      <span id="f2527">The hours representing the time travelled over were carefully noted, and the calculation was easy. </span>
      <span id="f2528">Barbicane found that this point would be reached at one in the morning on the night of the 7th—8th of December. </span>
      <span id="f2529">So that, if nothing interfered with its course, it would reach the given point in twenty-two hours.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2530">The rockets had primarily been placed to check the fall of the projectile upon the moon, and now they were going to employ them for a directly contrary purpose. </span>
      <span id="f2531">In any case they were ready, and they had only to wait for the moment to set fire to them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2532">&#34;Since there is nothing else to be done,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;I make a proposition.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2533">&#34;What is it?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2534">&#34;I propose to go to sleep.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2535">&#34;What a motion!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2536">&#34;It is forty hours since we closed our eyes,&#34; said Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f2537">&#34;Some hours of sleep will restore our strength.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2538">&#34;Never,&#34; interrupted Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2539">&#34;Well,&#34; continued Nicholl, &#34;every one to his taste; I shall go to sleep.&#34; And stretching himself on the divan, he soon snored like a forty-eight pounder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2540">&#34;That Nicholl has a good deal of sense,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;presently I shall follow his example.&#34; Some moments after his continued base supported the captain&#39;s barytone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2541">&#34;Certainly,&#34; said Michel Ardan, finding himself alone, &#34;these practical people have sometimes most opportune ideas.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2542">And with his long legs stretched out, and his great arms folded under his head, Michel slept in his turn.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2543">But this sleep could be neither peaceful nor lasting, the minds of these three men were too much occupied, and some hours after, about seven in the morning, all three were on foot at the same instant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2544">The projectile was still leaving the moon, and turning its conical part more and more towards her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2545">An explicable phenomenon, but one which happily served Barbicane&#39;s ends.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2546">Seventeen hours more, and the moment for action would have arrived.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2547">The day seemed long. </span>
      <span id="f2548">However bold the travellers might be, they were greatly impressed by the approach of that moment which would decide all—either precipitate their fall on to the moon, or for ever chain them in an immutable orbit. </span>
      <span id="f2549">They counted the hours as they passed too slow for their wish; Barbicane and Nicholl were obstinately plunged in their calculations, Michel going and coming between the narrow walls, and watching that impassive moon with a longing eye.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2550">At times recollections of the earth crossed their minds. </span>
      <span id="f2551">They saw once more their friends of the Gun Club, and the dearest of all, J. </span>
      <span id="f2552">T. </span>
      <span id="f2553">Maston. </span>
      <span id="f2554">At that moment, the honourable secretary must be filling his post on the Rocky Mountains. </span>
      <span id="f2555">If he could see the projectile through the glass of his gigantic telescope, what would he think? </span>
      <span id="f2556">After seeing it disappear behind the moon&#39;s south pole, he would see them reappear by the north pole! </span>
      <span id="f2557">They must therefore be a satellite of a satellite! </span>
      <span id="f2558">Had J. </span>
      <span id="f2559">T. </span>
      <span id="f2560">Maston given this unexpected news to the world? </span>
      <span id="f2561">Was this the dénouement of this great enterprise?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2562">But the day passed without incident. </span>
      <span id="f2563">The terrestrial midnight arrived. </span>
      <span id="f2564">The 8th of December was beginning. </span>
      <span id="f2565">One hour more, and the point of equal attraction would be reached. </span>
      <span id="f2566">What speed would then animate the projectile? </span>
      <span id="f2567">They could not estimate it. </span>
      <span id="f2568">But no error could vitiate Barbicane&#39;s calculations. </span>
      <span id="f2569">At one in the morning this speed ought to be and would be _nil._</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2570">Besides, another phenomenon would mark the projectile&#39;s stopping-point on the neutral line. </span>
      <span id="f2571">At that spot the two attractions, lunar and terrestrial, would be annulled. </span>
      <span id="f2572">Objects would &#34;weigh&#34; no more. </span>
      <span id="f2573">This singular fact, which had surprised Barbicane and his companions so much in going, would be repeated on their return under the very same conditions. </span>
      <span id="f2574">At this precise moment they must act.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2575">Already the projectile&#39;s conical top was sensibly turned towards the lunar disc, presented in such a way as to utilize the whole of the recoil produced by the pressure of the rocket apparatus. </span>
      <span id="f2576">The chances were in favour of the travellers. </span>
      <span id="f2577">If its speed was utterly annulled on this dead point, a decided movement towards the moon would suffice, however slight, to determine its fall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2578">&#34;Five minutes to one,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2579">&#34;All is ready,&#34; replied Michel Ardan, directing a lighted match to the flame of the gas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2580">&#34;Wait!&#34; said Barbicane, holding his chronometer in his hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2581">At that moment weight had no effect. </span>
      <span id="f2582">The travellers felt in themselves the entire disappearance of it. </span>
      <span id="f2583">They were very near the neutral point, if they did not touch it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2584">&#34;One o&#39;clock,&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2585">Michel Ardan applied the lighted match to a train in communication with the rockets. </span>
      <span id="f2586">No detonation was heard in the inside, for there was no air. </span>
      <span id="f2587">But, through the scuttles Barbicane saw a prolonged smoke, the flames of which were immediately extinguished.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2588">The projectile sustained a certain shock, which was sensibly felt in the interior.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2589">The three friends looked and listened without speaking, and scarcely breathing. </span>
      <span id="f2590">One might have heard the beating of their hearts amidst this perfect silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2591">&#34;Are we falling?&#34; asked Michel Ardan, at length.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2592">&#34;No,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;since the bottom of the projectile is not turning to the lunar disc!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2593">At this moment, Barbicane, quitting the scuttle, turned to his two companions. </span>
      <span id="f2594">He was frightfully pale, his forehead wrinkled, and his lips contracted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2595">&#34;We are falling!&#34; said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2596">&#34;Ah!&#34; cried Michel Ardan, &#34;on to the moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2597">&#34;On to the earth!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2598">&#34;The devil!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, adding philosophically, &#34;well, when we came into this projectile we were very doubtful as to the ease with which we should get out of it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2599">And now this fearful fall had begun. </span>
      <span id="f2600">The speed retained had borne the projectile beyond the dead point. </span>
      <span id="f2601">The explosion of the rockets could not divert its course. </span>
      <span id="f2602">This speed in going had carried it over the neutral line, and in returning had done the same thing. </span>
      <span id="f2603">The laws of physics condemned _it to pass through every point which it had already gone through_. </span>
      <span id="f2604">It was a terrible fall, from a height of 160,000 miles, and no springs to break it. </span>
      <span id="f2605">According to the laws of gunnery, the projectile must strike the earth with a speed equal to that with which it left the mouth of the Columbiad, a speed of 16,000 yards in the last second.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2606">But to give some figures of comparison, it has been reckoned that an object thrown from the top of the towers of Notre Dame, the height of which is only 200 feet, will arrive on the pavement at a speed of 240 miles per hour. </span>
      <span id="f2607">Here the projectile must strike the earth with a speed of 115,200 miles per hour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2608">&#34;We are lost!&#34; said Michel coolly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2609">&#34;Very well! </span>
      <span id="f2610">if we die,&#34; answered Barbicane, with a sort of religious enthusiasm, &#34;the result of our travels will be magnificently spread. </span>
      <span id="f2611">It is His own secret that God will tell us! </span>
      <span id="f2612">In the other life the soul will want to know nothing, either of machines or engines! </span>
      <span id="f2613">It will be identified with eternal wisdom!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2614">&#34;In fact,&#34; interrupted Michel Ardan, &#34;the whole of the other world may well console us for the loss of that inferior orb called the moon!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2615">Barbicane crossed his arms on his breast, with a motion of sublime resignation, saying at the same time,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2616">&#34;The will of heaven be done!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>