<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0179">CHAPTER II.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0180">THE FIRST HALF-HOUR.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0181">What had happened? </span>
      <span id="f0182">What effect had this frightful shock produced? </span>
      <span id="f0183">Had the ingenuity of the constructors of the projectile obtained any happy result? </span>
      <span id="f0184">Had the shock been deadened, thanks to the springs, the four plugs, the water-cushions, and the partition-breaks? </span>
      <span id="f0185">Had they been able to subdue the frightful pressure of the initiatory speed of more than 11,000 yards, which was enough to traverse Paris or New York in a second? </span>
      <span id="f0186">This was evidently the question suggested to the thousand spectators of this moving scene. </span>
      <span id="f0187">They forgot the aim of the journey, and thought only of the travellers. </span>
      <span id="f0188">And if one amongst them—Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0189">Maston for example—could have cast one glimpse into the projectile, what would he have seen?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0190">Nothing then. </span>
      <span id="f0191">The darkness was profound. </span>
      <span id="f0192">But its cylindro-conical partitions had resisted wonderfully. </span>
      <span id="f0193">Not a rent or a dent anywhere! </span>
      <span id="f0194">The wonderful projectile was not even heated under the intense deflagration of the powder, nor liquefied, as they seemed to fear, in a shower of aluminium.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0195">The interior showed but little disorder; indeed, only a few objects had been violently thrown towards the roof; but the most important seemed not to have suffered from the shock at all; their fixtures were intact.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0196">On the movable disc, sunk down to the bottom by the smashing of the partition-breaks and the escape of the water, three bodies lay apparently lifeless. </span>
      <span id="f0197">Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan— did they still breathe? </span>
      <span id="f0198">or was the projectile nothing now but a metal coffin, bearing three corpses into space?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0199">Some minutes after the departure of the projectile, one of the bodies moved, shook its arms, lifted its head, and finally succeeded in getting on its knees. </span>
      <span id="f0200">It was Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0201">He felt himself all over, gave a sonorous &#34;Hem!&#34; and then said,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0202">&#34;Michel Ardan is whole. </span>
      <span id="f0203">How about the others?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0204">The courageous Frenchman tried to rise, but could not stand. </span>
      <span id="f0205">His head swam, from the rush of blood; he was blind; he was like a drunken man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0206">&#34;Bur-r!&#34; said he. </span>
      <span id="f0207">&#34;It produces the same effect as two bottles of Corton, though perhaps less agreeable to swallow.&#34; Then, passing his hand several times across his forehead and rubbing his temples, he called in a firm voice,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0208">&#34;Nicholl! </span>
      <span id="f0209">Barbicane!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0210">He waited anxiously. </span>
      <span id="f0211">No answer; not even a sigh to show that the hearts of his companions were still beating. </span>
      <span id="f0212">He called again. </span>
      <span id="f0213">The same silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0214">&#34;The devil!&#34; he exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f0215">They look as if they had fallen from a fifth story on their heads. </span>
      <span id="f0216">&#34;Bah!&#34; he added, with that imperturbable confidence which nothing could check, &#34;if a Frenchman can get on his knees, two Americans ought to be able to get on their feet. </span>
      <span id="f0217">But first let us light up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0218">Ardan felt the tide of life return by degrees. </span>
      <span id="f0219">His blood became calm, and returned to its accustomed circulation. </span>
      <span id="f0220">Another effort restored his equilibrium. </span>
      <span id="f0221">He succeeded in rising, drew a match from his pocket, and approaching the burner lighted it. </span>
      <span id="f0222">The receiver had not suffered at all. </span>
      <span id="f0223">The gas had not escaped. </span>
      <span id="f0224">Besides, the smell would have betrayed it; and in that case Michel Ardan could not have carried a lighted match with impunity through the space filled with hydrogen. </span>
      <span id="f0225">The gas mixing with the air would have produced a detonating mixture, and the explosion would have finished what the shock had perhaps begun. </span>
      <span id="f0226">When the burner was lit, Ardan leaned over the bodies of his companions: they were lying one on the other, an inert mass, Nicholl above, Barbicane underneath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0227">Ardan lifted the captain, propped him up against the divan, and began to rub vigorously. </span>
      <span id="f0228">This means, used with judgment, restored Nicholl, who opened his eyes, and instantly recovering his presence of mind, seized Ardan&#39;s hand and looked around him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0229">&#34;And Barbicane?&#34; said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0230">&#34;Each in turn,&#34; replied Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0231">&#34;I began with you, Nicholl, because you were on the top. </span>
      <span id="f0232">Now let us look to Barbicane.&#34; Saying which, Ardan and Nicholl raised the president of the Gun Club and laid him on the divan. </span>
      <span id="f0233">He seemed to have suffered more than either of his companions; he was bleeding, but Nicholl was reassured by finding that the hemorrhage came from a slight wound on the shoulder, a mere graze, which he bound up carefully.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0234">Still, Barbicane was a long time coming to himself, which frightened his friends, who did not spare friction.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0235">&#34;He breathes though,&#34; said Nicholl, putting his ear to the chest of the wounded man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0236">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Ardan, &#34;he breathes like a man who has some notion of that daily operation. </span>
      <span id="f0237">Rub, Nicholl; let us rub harder.&#34; And the two improvised practitioners worked so hard and so well that Barbicane recovered his senses. </span>
      <span id="f0238">He opened his eyes, sat up, took his two friends by the hands, and his first words were—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0239">&#34;Nicholl, are we moving?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0240">Nicholl and Barbicane looked at each other; they had not yet troubled themselves about the projectile; their first thought had been for the traveller, not for the car.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0241">&#34;Well, are we really moving?&#34; repeated Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0242">&#34;Or quietly resting on the soil of Florida?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0243">&#34;Or at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico?&#34; added Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0244">&#34;What an idea!&#34; exclaimed the president.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0245">And this double hypothesis suggested by his companions had the effect of recalling him to his senses. </span>
      <span id="f0246">In any case they could not yet decide on the position of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0247">Its apparent immovability, and the want of communication with the outside, prevented them from solving the question. </span>
      <span id="f0248">Perhaps the projectile was unwinding its course through space. </span>
      <span id="f0249">Perhaps after a short rise it had fallen upon the earth, or even in the Gulf of Mexico—a fall which the narrowness of the peninsula of Florida would render not impossible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0250">The case was serious, the problem interesting, and one that must be solved as soon as possible. </span>
      <span id="f0251">Thus, highly excited, Barbicane&#39;s moral energy triumphed over physical weakness, and he rose to his feet. </span>
      <span id="f0252">He listened. </span>
      <span id="f0253">Outside was perfect silence; but the thick padding was enough to intercept all sounds coming from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0254">But one circumstance struck Barbicane, viz., that the temperature inside the projectile was singularly high. </span>
      <span id="f0255">The president drew a thermometer from its case and consulted it. </span>
      <span id="f0256">The instrument showed 81° Fahr.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0257">&#34;Yes,&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;yes, we are moving! </span>
      <span id="f0258">This stifling heat, penetrating through the partitions of the projectile, is produced by its friction on the atmospheric strata. </span>
      <span id="f0259">It will soon diminish, because we are already floating in space, and after having been nearly stifled, we shall have to suffer intense cold.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0260">&#34;What!&#34; said Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0261">&#34;According to your showing, Barbicane, we are already beyond the limits of the terrestrial atmosphere?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0262">&#34;Without a doubt, Michel. </span>
      <span id="f0263">Listen to me. </span>
      <span id="f0264">It is fifty-five minutes past ten; we have been gone about eight minutes; and if our initiatory speed has not been checked by the friction, six seconds would be enough for us to pass through the forty miles of atmosphere which surrounds the globe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0265">&#34;Just so,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;but in what proportion do you estimate the diminution of speed by friction?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0266">&#34;In the proportion of one-third, Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f0267">This diminution is considerable, but according to my calculations it is nothing less. </span>
      <span id="f0268">If, then, we had an initiatory speed of 12,000 yards, on leaving the atmosphere this speed would be reduced to 9165 yards. </span>
      <span id="f0269">In any case we have already passed through this interval, and—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0270">&#34;And then,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;friend Nicholl has lost his two bets: four thousand dollars because the Columbiad did not burst; five thousand dollars because the projectile has risen more than six miles. </span>
      <span id="f0271">Now, Nicholl, pay up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0272">&#34;Let us prove it first,&#34; said the captain, &#34;and we will pay afterwards. </span>
      <span id="f0273">It is quite possible that Barbicane&#39;s reasoning is correct, and that I have lost my nine thousand dollars. </span>
      <span id="f0274">But a new hypothesis presents itself to my mind, and it annuls the wager.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0275">&#34;What is that?&#34; asked Barbicane quickly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0276">&#34;The hypothesis that, for some reason or other, fire was never set to the powder, we have not started at all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0277">&#34;My goodness, captain,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;that hypothesis is worthy of my brain! </span>
      <span id="f0278">It cannot be a serious one. </span>
      <span id="f0279">For have we not been half annihilated by the shock? </span>
      <span id="f0280">Did I not recall you to life? </span>
      <span id="f0281">Is not the president&#39;s shoulder still bleeding from the blow it has received?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0282">&#34;Granted,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;but one question.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0283">&#34;Well, captain?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0284">&#34;Did you hear the detonation, which certainly ought to be loud?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0285">&#34;No,&#34; replied Ardan, much surprised; &#34;certainly I did not hear the detonation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0286">&#34;And you, Barbicane?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0287">&#34;Nor I, either.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0288">&#34;Very well,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0289">&#34;Well now,&#34; murmured the president &#34;why did we not hear the detonation?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0290">The three friends looked at each other with a disconcerted air. </span>
      <span id="f0291">It was quite an inexplicable phenomenon. </span>
      <span id="f0292">The projectile had started, and consequently there must have been a detonation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0293">&#34;Let us first find out where we are,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;and let down the panel.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0294">This very simple operation was soon accomplished.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0295">The nuts which held the bolts to the outer plates of the right-hand scuttle gave way under the pressure of the English wrench. </span>
      <span id="f0296">These bolts were pushed outside, and buffers covered with india-rubber stopped up the holes which let them through. </span>
      <span id="f0297">Immediately the outer plate fell back upon its hinges like a porthole, and the lenticular glass which closed the scuttle appeared. </span>
      <span id="f0298">A similar one was let into the thick partition on the opposite side of the projectile, another in the top of the dome, and finally a fourth in the middle of the base. </span>
      <span id="f0299">They could, therefore, make observations in four different directions: the firmament by the side and most direct windows, the earth or the moon by the upper and under openings in the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0300">Barbicane and his two companions immediately rushed to the uncovered window. </span>
      <span id="f0301">But it was lit by no ray of light. </span>
      <span id="f0302">Profound darkness surrounded them, which, however, did not prevent the president from exclaiming,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0303">&#34;No, my friends, we have not fallen back upon the earth; no, nor are we submerged in the Gulf of Mexico. </span>
      <span id="f0304">Yes! </span>
      <span id="f0305">we are mounting into space. </span>
      <span id="f0306">See those stars shining in the night, and that impenetrable darkness heaped up between the earth and us!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0307">&#34;Hurrah! </span>
      <span id="f0308">hurrah!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan and Nicholl in one voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0309">Indeed, this thick darkness proved that the projectile had left the earth, for the soil, brilliantly lit by the moonbeams, would have been visible to the travellers, if they had been lying on its surface. </span>
      <span id="f0310">This darkness also showed that the projectile had passed the atmospheric strata, for the diffused light spread in the air would have been reflected on the metal walls, which reflection was wanting. </span>
      <span id="f0311">This light would have lit the window, and the window was dark. </span>
      <span id="f0312">Doubt was no longer possible; the travellers had left the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0313">&#34;I have lost,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0314">&#34;I congratulate you,&#34; replied Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0315">&#34;Here are the nine thousand dollars,&#34; said the captain, drawing a roll of paper dollars from his pocket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0316">&#34;Will you have a receipt for it?&#34; asked Barbicane, taking the sum.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0317">&#34;If you do not mind,&#34; answered Nicholl; &#34;it is more business-like.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0318">And coolly and seriously, as if he had been at his strong-box, the president drew forth his note-book, tore out a blank leaf, wrote a proper receipt in pencil, dated and signed it with the usual flourish,* and gave it to the captain, who carefully placed it in his pocketbook. </span>
      <span id="f0319">Michel Ardan, taking off his hat, bowed to his two companions without speaking. </span>
      <span id="f0320">So much formality under such circumstances left him speechless. </span>
      <span id="f0321">He had never before seen anything so &#34;American.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0322">* This is a purely French habit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0323">This affair settled, Barbicane and Nicholl had returned to the window, and were watching the constellations. </span>
      <span id="f0324">The stars looked like bright points on the black sky. </span>
      <span id="f0325">But from that side they could not see the orb of night, which, travelling from east to west, would rise by degrees towards the zenith. </span>
      <span id="f0326">Its absence drew the following remark from Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0327">&#34;And the moon; will she perchance fail at our rendezvous?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0328">&#34;Do not alarm yourself,&#34; said Barbicane; &#34;our future globe is at its post, but we cannot see her from this side; let us open the other.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0329">As Barbicane was about leaving the window to open the opposite scuttle, his attention was attracted by the approach of a brilliant object. </span>
      <span id="f0330">It was an enormous disc, whose colossal dimension could not be estimated. </span>
      <span id="f0331">Its face, which was turned to the earth, was very bright. </span>
      <span id="f0332">One might have thought it a small moon reflecting the light of the larger one. </span>
      <span id="f0333">She advanced with great speed, and seemed to describe an orbit round the earth, which would intersect the passage of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0334">This body revolved upon its axis, and exhibited the phenomena of all celestial bodies abandoned in space.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0335">&#34;Ah!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;what is that? </span>
      <span id="f0336">another projectile?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0337">Barbicane did not answer. </span>
      <span id="f0338">The appearance of this enormous body surprised and troubled him. </span>
      <span id="f0339">A collision was possible, and might be attended with deplorable results; either the projectile would deviate from its path, or a shock, breaking its impetus, might precipitate it to the earth; or, lastly, it might be irresistibly drawn away by the powerful asteroid. </span>
      <span id="f0340">The president caught at a glance the consequences of these three hypotheses, either of which would, one way or the other, bring their experiment to an unsuccessful and fatal termination. </span>
      <span id="f0341">His companions stood silently looking into space. </span>
      <span id="f0342">The object grew rapidly as it approached them, and by an optical illusion the projectile seemed to be throwing itself before it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0343">&#34;By Jove!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;we shall run into one another!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0344">Instinctively the travellers drew back. </span>
      <span id="f0345">Their dread was great, but it did not last many seconds. </span>
      <span id="f0346">The asteroid passed several hundred yards from the projectile and disappeared, not so much from the rapidity of its course, as that its face being opposite the moon, it was suddenly merged into the perfect darkness of space.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0347">&#34;A happy journey to you,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, with a sigh of relief. </span>
      <span id="f0348">&#34;Surely infinity of space is large enough for a poor little projectile to walk through without fear. </span>
      <span id="f0349">Now, what is this portentous globe which nearly struck us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0350">&#34;I know,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0351">&#34;Oh, indeed! </span>
      <span id="f0352">you know everything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0353">&#34;It is,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;a simple meteorite, but an enormous one, which the attraction of the earth has retained as a satellite.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0354">&#34;Is it possible!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan; &#34;the earth then has two moons like Neptune?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0355">&#34;Yes, my friend, two moons, though it passes generally for having only one; but this second moon is so small, and its speed so great, that the inhabitants of the earth cannot see it. </span>
      <span id="f0356">It was by noticing disturbances that a French astronomer, M. </span>
      <span id="f0357">Petit, was able to determine the existence of this second satellite and calculate its elements. </span>
      <span id="f0358">According to his observations, this meteorite will accomplish its revolution round the earth in three hours and twenty minutes, which implies a wonderful rate of speed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0359">&#34;Do all astronomers admit the existence of this satellite?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0360">&#34;No,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;but if, like us, they had met it, they could no longer doubt it. </span>
      <span id="f0361">Indeed, I think that this meteorite, which, had it struck the projectile, would have much embarrassed us, will give us the means of deciding what our position in space is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0362">&#34;How?&#34; said Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0363">&#34;Because its distance is known, and when we met it, we were exactly 4650 miles from the surface of the terrestrial globe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0364">&#34;More than 2000 French leagues,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0365">&#34;That beats the express trains of the pitiful globe called the earth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0366">&#34;I should think so,&#34; replied Nicholl, consulting his chronometer; &#34;it is eleven o&#39;clock, and it is only thirteen minutes since we left the American Continent.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0367">&#34;Only thirteen minutes?&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0368">&#34;Yes,&#34; said Nicholl; &#34;and if our initiatory speed of 12,000 yards has been kept up, we shall have made about 20,000 miles in the hour.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0369">&#34;That is all very well, my friends,&#34; said the president, &#34;but the insoluble question still remains. </span>
      <span id="f0370">Why did we not hear the detonation of the Columbiad?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0371">For want of an answer the conversation dropped, and Barbicane began thoughtfully to let down the shutter of the second side. </span>
      <span id="f0372">He succeeded; and through the uncovered glass the moon filled the projectile with a brilliant light. </span>
      <span id="f0373">Nicholl, as an economical man, put out the gas, now useless, and whose brilliancy prevented any observation of the interplanetary space.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0374">The lunar disc shone with wonderful purity. </span>
      <span id="f0375">Her rays, no longer filtered through the vapoury atmosphere of the terrestrial globe, shone through the glass, filling the air in the interior of the projectile with silvery reflections. </span>
      <span id="f0376">The black curtain of the firmament in reality heightened the moon&#39;s brilliancy, which in this void of ether unfavourable to diffusion did not eclipse the neighbouring stars. </span>
      <span id="f0377">The heavens, thus seen, presented quite a new aspect, and one which the human eye could never dream of. </span>
      <span id="f0378">One may conceive the interest with which these bold men watched the orb of night, the great aim of their journey.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0379">In its motion the earth&#39;s satellite was insensibly nearing the zenith, the mathematical point which it ought to attain ninety-six hours later. </span>
      <span id="f0380">Her mountains, her plains, every projection was as clearly discernible to their eyes as if they were observing it from some spot upon the earth; but its light was developed through space with wonderful intensity. </span>
      <span id="f0381">The disc shone like a platinum mirror. </span>
      <span id="f0382">Of the earth flying from under their feet, the travellers had lost all recollection.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0383">It was Captain Nicholl who first recalled their attention to the vanishing globe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0384">&#34;Yes,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;do not let us be ungrateful to it. </span>
      <span id="f0385">Since we are leaving our country, let our last looks be directed to it. </span>
      <span id="f0386">I wish to see the earth once more before it is quite hidden from my eyes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0387">To satisfy his companions, Barbicane began to uncover the window at the bottom of the projectile, which would allow them to observe the earth direct. </span>
      <span id="f0388">The disc, which the force of the projection had beaten down to the base, was removed, not without difficulty. </span>
      <span id="f0389">Its fragments, placed carefully against the wall, might serve again upon occasion. </span>
      <span id="f0390">Then a circular gap appeared, nineteen inches in diameter, hollowed out of the lower part of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0391">A glass cover, six inches thick and strengthened with upper fastenings, closed it tightly. </span>
      <span id="f0392">Beneath was fixed an aluminium plate, held in place by bolts. </span>
      <span id="f0393">The screws being undone, and the bolts let go, the plate fell down, and visible communication was established between the interior and the exterior.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0394">Michel Ardan knelt by the glass. </span>
      <span id="f0395">It was cloudy, seemingly opaque.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0396">&#34;Well!&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;and the earth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0397">&#34;The earth?&#34; said Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0398">&#34;There it is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0399">&#34;What! </span>
      <span id="f0400">that little thread; that silver crescent?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0401">&#34;Doubtless, Michel. </span>
      <span id="f0402">In four days, when the moon will be full, at the very time we shall reach it, the earth will be new, and will only appear to us as a slender crescent which will soon disappear, and for some days will be enveloped in utter darkness.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0403">&#34;That the earth?&#34; repeated Michel Ardan, looking with all his eyes at the thin slip of his native planet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0404">The explanation given by President Barbicane was correct. </span>
      <span id="f0405">The earth, with respect to the projectile, was entering its last phase. </span>
      <span id="f0406">It was in its octant, and showed a crescent finely traced on the dark background of the sky. </span>
      <span id="f0407">Its light, rendered bluish by the thick strata of the atmosphere was less intense than that of the crescent moon, but it was of considerable dimensions, and looked like an enormous arch stretched across the firmament. </span>
      <span id="f0408">Some parts brilliantly lighted, especially on its concave part, showed the presence of high mountains, often disappearing behind thick spots, which are never seen on the lunar disc. </span>
      <span id="f0409">They were rings of clouds placed concentrically round the terrestrial globe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0410">Whilst the travellers were trying to pierce the profound darkness, a brilliant cluster of shooting stars burst upon their eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0411">Hundreds of meteorites, ignited by the friction of the atmosphere, irradiated the shadow of the luminous train, and lined the cloudy parts of the disc with their fire. </span>
      <span id="f0412">At this period the earth was in its perihelium, and the month of December is so propitious to these shooting stars, that astronomers have counted as many as twenty-four thousand in an hour. </span>
      <span id="f0413">But Michel Ardan, disdaining scientific reasonings, preferred thinking that the earth was thus saluting the departure of her three children with her most brilliant fireworks.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0414">Indeed this was all they saw of the globe lost in the shadow, an inferior orb of the solar world, rising and setting to the great planets like a simple morning or evening star! </span>
      <span id="f0415">This globe, where they had left all their affections, was nothing more than a fugitive crescent!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0416">Long did the three friends look without speaking, though united in heart, whilst the projectile sped onward with an ever-decreasing speed. </span>
      <span id="f0417">Then an irresistible drowsiness crept over their brain. </span>
      <span id="f0418">Was it weariness both of body and mind? </span>
      <span id="f0419">No doubt; for after the over-excitement of those last hours passed upon earth, reaction was inevitable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0420">&#34;Well,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;since we must sleep, let us sleep.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0421">And stretching themselves on their couches, they were all three soon in a profound slumber.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0422">But they had not forgotten themselves more than a quarter of an hour, when Barbicane sat up suddenly, and rousing his companions with a loud voice, exclaimed,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">&#34;I have found it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0424">&#34;What have you found?&#34; asked Michel Ardan, jumping from his bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0425">&#34;The reason why we did not hear the detonation of the Columbiad.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0426">&#34;And it is—?&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0427">&#34;Because our projectile travelled _faster than the sound!_&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>