<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2617">CHAPTER XX.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2618">THE SOUNDINGS OF THE &#34;SUSQUEHANNA.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2619">&#34;Well, lieutenant, and our soundings?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2620">&#34;I think, sir, that the operation is nearing its completion,&#34; replied Lieutenant Bronsfield. </span>
      <span id="f2621">&#34;But who would have thought of finding such a depth so near in shore, and only 200 miles from the American coast?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2622">&#34;Certainly, Bronsfield, there is a great depression,&#34; said Captain Blomsberry. </span>
      <span id="f2623">&#34;In this spot there is a submarine valley worn by Humboldt&#39;s current, which skirts the coast of America as far as the Straits of Magellan.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2624">&#34;These great depths,&#34; continued the lieutenant, &#34;are not favourable for laying telegraphic cables. </span>
      <span id="f2625">A level bottom, like that supporting the American cable between Valentia and Newfoundland, is much better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2626">&#34;I agree with you, Bronsfield. </span>
      <span id="f2627">With your permission, lieutenant, where are we now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2628">&#34;Sir, at this moment we have 3508 fathoms of line out, and the ball which draws the sounding lead has not yet touched the bottom; for if so, it would have come up of itself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2629">&#34;Brook&#39;s apparatus is very ingenious,&#34; said Captain Blomsberry; &#34;it gives us very exact soundings.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2630">&#34;Touch!&#34; cried at this moment one of the men at the fore-wheel, who was superintending the operation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2631">The captain and the lieutenant mounted the quarter-deck. </span>
      <span id="f2632">&#34;What depth have we?&#34; asked the captain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2633">&#34;Three thousand six hundred and twenty-seven fathoms,&#34; replied the lieutenant, entering it in his note-book.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2634">&#34;Well, Bronsfield,&#34; said the captain, &#34;I will take down the result. </span>
      <span id="f2635">Now haul in the sounding line. </span>
      <span id="f2636">It will be the work of some hours. </span>
      <span id="f2637">In that time the engineer can light the furnaces, and we shall be ready to start as soon as you have finished. </span>
      <span id="f2638">It is ten o&#39;clock, and with your permission, lieutenant, I will turn in.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2639">&#34;Do so, sir; do so!&#34; replied the lieutenant obligingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2640">The captain of the &#34;Susquehanna,&#34; as brave a man as need be, and the humble servant of his officers, returned to his cabin, took a brandy-grog, which earned for the steward no end of praise, and turned in, not without having complimented his servant upon his making beds, and slept a peaceful sleep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2641">It was then ten at night. </span>
      <span id="f2642">The eleventh day of the month of December was drawing to a close in a magnificent night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2643">The &#34;Susquehanna,&#34; a corvette of 500 horse-power, of the United States&#39; navy, was occupied in taking soundings in the Pacific Ocean about 200 miles off the American coast, following that long peninsula which stretches down the coast of New Mexico.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2644">The wind had dropped by degrees. </span>
      <span id="f2645">There was no disturbance in the air. </span>
      <span id="f2646">Their pennant hung motionless from the maintop-gallant-mast truck.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2647">Captain Jonathan Blomsberry (cousin-german of Colonel Blomsberry, one of the most ardent supporters of the Gun Club, who had married an aunt of the captain and daughter of an honourable Kentucky merchant,)—Captain Blomsberry could not have wished for finer weather in which to bring to a close his delicate operations of sounding. </span>
      <span id="f2648">His corvette had not even felt the great tempest, which by sweeping away the groups of clouds on the Rocky Mountains, had allowed them to observe the course of the famous projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2649">Everything went well, and with all the fervour of a Presbyterian, he did not forget to thank heaven for it. </span>
      <span id="f2650">The series of soundings taken by the &#34;Susquehanna,&#34; had for its aim the finding of a favourable spot for the laying of a submarine cable to connect the Hawaiian Islands with the coast of America.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2651">It was a great undertaking, due to the instigation of a powerful company. </span>
      <span id="f2652">Its managing director, the intelligent Cyrus Field, purposed even covering all the islands of Oceania with a vast electrical network, an immense enterprise, and one worthy of American genius.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2653">To the corvette Susquehanna had been confided the first operations of sounding. </span>
      <span id="f2654">It was on the night of the 11th—12th of December, she was in exactly 27° 7&#39; north lat., and 41° 37&#39; west long., on the meridian of Washington.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2655">The moon, then in her last quarter, was beginning to rise above the horizon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2656">After the departure of Captain Blomsberry, the lieutenant and some officers were standing together on the poop. </span>
      <span id="f2657">On the appearance of the moon, their thoughts turned to that orb which the eyes of a whole hemisphere were contemplating. </span>
      <span id="f2658">The best naval glasses could not have discovered the projectile wandering around its hemisphere, and yet all were pointed towards that brilliant disc which millions of eyes were looking at at the same moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2659">&#34;They have been gone ten days,&#34; said Lieutenant Bronsfield at last. </span>
      <span id="f2660">&#34;What has become of them?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2661">&#34;They have arrived, lieutenant,&#34; exclaimed a young midshipman, &#34;and they are doing what all travellers do when they arrive in a new country, taking a walk!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2662">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f2663">I am sure of that, if you tell me so, my young friend,&#34; said Lieutenant Bronsfield, smiling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2664">&#34;But,&#34; continued another officer, &#34;their arrival cannot be doubted. </span>
      <span id="f2665">The projectile was to reach the moon when full on the 5th at midnight. </span>
      <span id="f2666">We are now at the 11th of December, which makes six days. </span>
      <span id="f2667">And in six times twenty-four hours, without darkness, one would have time to settle comfortably. </span>
      <span id="f2668">I fancy I see my brave countrymen encamped at the bottom of some valley, on the borders of a Selenite stream, near a projectile half buried by its fall amidst volcanic rubbish, Captain Nicholl beginning his levelling operations, President Barbicane writing out his notes, and Michel Ardan embalming the lunar solitudes with the perfume of his—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2669">&#34;Yes! </span>
      <span id="f2670">it must be so, it is so!&#34; exclaimed the young midshipman, worked up to a pitch of enthusiasm by this ideal description of his superior officer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2671">&#34;I should like to believe it,&#34; replied the lieutenant, who was quite unmoved. </span>
      <span id="f2672">&#34;Unfortunately direct news from the lunar world is still wanting.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2673">&#34;Beg pardon, lieutenant,&#34; said the midshipman, &#34;but cannot President Barbicane write?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2674">A burst of laughter greeted this answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2675">&#34;No letters!&#34; continued the young man quickly. </span>
      <span id="f2676">&#34;The postal administration has something to see to there.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2677">&#34;Might it not be the telegraphic service that is at fault?&#34; asked one of the officers ironically.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2678">&#34;Not necessarily,&#34; replied the midshipman, not at all confused. </span>
      <span id="f2679">&#34;But it is very easy to set up a graphic communication with the earth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2680">&#34;And how?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2681">&#34;By means of the telescope at Long&#39;s Peak. </span>
      <span id="f2682">You know it brings the moon to within four miles of the Rocky Mountains, and that it shows objects on its surface of only nine feet in diameter. </span>
      <span id="f2683">Very well; let our industrious friends construct a gigantic alphabet; let them write words three fathoms long, and sentences three miles long, and then they can send us news of themselves?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2684">The young midshipman, who had a certain amount of imagination, was loudly applauded; Lieutenant Bronsfield allowing that the idea was possible, but observing that if by these means they could _receive_ news from the lunar world they could not send any from the terrestrial, unless the Selenites had instruments fit for taking distant observations at their disposal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2685">&#34;Evidently,&#34; said one of the officers; &#34;but what has become of the travellers? </span>
      <span id="f2686">what they have done, what they have seen, that above all must interest us. </span>
      <span id="f2687">Besides, if the experiment has succeeded (which I do not doubt), they will try it again. </span>
      <span id="f2688">The Columbiad is still sunk in the soil of Florida. </span>
      <span id="f2689">It is now only a question of powder and shot; and every time the moon is at her zenith a cargo of visitors may be sent to her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2690">&#34;It is clear,&#34; replied Lieutenant Bronsfield, &#34;that J. </span>
      <span id="f2691">T. </span>
      <span id="f2692">Maston will one day join his friends.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2693">&#34;If he will have me,&#34; cried the midshipman, &#34;I am ready!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2694">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f2695">volunteers will not be wanting,&#34; answered Bronsfield; &#34;and if it were allowed, half of the earth&#39;s inhabitants would emigrate to the moon!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2696">This conversation between the officers of the Susquehanna was kept up until nearly one in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f2697">We cannot say what blundering systems were broached, what inconsistent theories advanced by these bold spirits. </span>
      <span id="f2698">Since Barbicane&#39;s attempt, nothing seemed impossible to the Americans. </span>
      <span id="f2699">They had already designed an expedition, not only of savants, but of a whole colony towards the Selenite borders, and a complete army, consisting of infantry, artillery, and cavalry, to conquer the lunar world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2700">At one in the morning, the hauling in of the sounding-line was not yet completed; 1670 fathoms were still out, which would entail some hours&#39; work. </span>
      <span id="f2701">According to the commander&#39;s orders, the fires had been lighted, and steam was being got up. </span>
      <span id="f2702">The Susquehanna could have started that very instant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2703">At that moment (it was seventeen minutes past one in the morning) Lieutenant Bronsfield was preparing to leave the watch and return to his cabin, when his attention was attracted by a distant hissing noise. </span>
      <span id="f2704">His comrades and himself first thought that this hissing was caused by the letting off of steam; but lifting their heads, they found that the noise was produced in the highest regions of the air. </span>
      <span id="f2705">They had not time to question each other before the hissing became frightfully intense, and suddenly there appeared to their dazzled eyes an enormous meteor, ignited by the rapidity of its course and its friction through the atmospheric strata.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2706">This fiery mass grew larger to their eyes, and fell, with the noise of thunder, upon the bowsprit, which it smashed close to the stem, and buried itself in the waves with a deafening roar!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2707">A few feet nearer, and the Susquehanna would have foundered with all on board!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2708">At this instant Captain Blomsberry appeared, half dressed, and rushing on to the forecastle-deck, whither all the officers had hurried, exclaimed, &#34;With your permission, gentlemen, what has happened?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2709">And the midshipman, making himself as it were the echo of the body, cried, &#34;Commander, it is &#39;they&#39; come back again!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>