<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2710">CHAPTER XXI.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2711">J. </span>
      <span id="f2712">T. </span>
      <span id="f2713">MASTON RECALLED.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2714">&#34;It is &#39;they&#39; come back again!&#34; the young midshipman had said; and every one had understood him. </span>
      <span id="f2715">No one doubted but that that meteor was the projectile of the Gun Club. </span>
      <span id="f2716">As to the travellers which it enclosed, opinions were divided regarding their fate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2717">&#34;They are dead!&#34; said one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2718">&#34;They are alive!&#34; said another; &#34;the crater is deep, and the shock was deadened.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2719">&#34;But they must have wanted air,&#34; continued a third speaker; &#34;they must have died of suffocation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2720">&#34;Burnt!&#34; replied a fourth; &#34;the projectile was nothing but an incandescent mass as it crossed the atmosphere.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2721">&#34;What does it matter!&#34; they exclaimed unanimously; &#34;living or dead, we must pull them out!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2722">But Captain Blomsberry had assembled his officers, and &#34;with their permission,&#34; was holding a council. </span>
      <span id="f2723">They must decide upon something to be done immediately. </span>
      <span id="f2724">The more hasty ones were for fishing up the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f2725">A difficult operation, though not an impossible one. </span>
      <span id="f2726">But the corvette had no proper machinery, which must be both fixed and powerful; so it was resolved that they should put in at the nearest port, and give information to the Gun Club of the projectile&#39;s fall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2727">This determination was unanimous. </span>
      <span id="f2728">The choice of the port had to be discussed. </span>
      <span id="f2729">The neighbouring coast had no anchorage on 27° lat. </span>
      <span id="f2730">Higher up, above the peninsula of Monterey, stands the important town from which it takes its name; but, seated on the borders of a perfect desert, it was not connected with the interior by a network of telegraphic wires, and electricity alone could spread these important news fast enough.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2731">Some degrees above opened the bay of San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f2732">Through the capital of the gold country communication would be easy with the heart of the Union. </span>
      <span id="f2733">And in less than two days the &#34;Susquehanna,&#34; by putting on high pressure, could arrive in that port. </span>
      <span id="f2734">She must therefore start at once.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2735">The fires were made up; they could set off immediately. </span>
      <span id="f2736">Two thousand fathoms of line were still out, which Captain Blomsberry, not wishing to lose precious time in hauling in, resolved to cut.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2737">&#34;We will fasten the end to a buoy,&#34; said he, &#34;and that buoy will show us the exact spot where the projectile fell.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2738">&#34;Besides,&#34; replied Lieutenant Bronsfield, &#34;we have our situation exact—27° 7&#39; north lat. </span>
      <span id="f2739">and 41° 37&#39; west long.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2740">&#34;Well, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2741">Bronsfield,&#34; replied the captain, &#34;now, with your permission, we will have the line cut.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2742">A strong buoy, strengthened by a couple of spars, was thrown into the ocean. </span>
      <span id="f2743">The end of the rope was carefully lashed to it; and, left solely to the rise and fall of the billows, the buoy would not sensibly deviate from the spot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2744">At this moment the engineer sent to inform the captain that steam was up and they could start, for which agreeable communication the captain thanked him. </span>
      <span id="f2745">The course was then given north-north-east, and the corvette, wearing, steered at full steam direct for San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f2746">It was three in the morning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2747">Four hundred and fifty miles to cross; it was nothing for a good vessel like the &#34;Susquehanna.&#34; In thirty-six hours she had covered that distance; and on the 14th of December, at twenty-seven minutes past one at night, she entered the bay of San Francisco.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2748">At the sight of a ship of the national navy arriving at full speed, with her bowsprit broken, public curiosity was greatly roused. </span>
      <span id="f2749">A dense crowd soon assembled on the quay, waiting for them to disembark.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2750">After casting anchor, Captain Blomsberry and Lieutenant Bronsfield entered an eight-oared cutter, which soon brought them to land.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2751">They jumped on to the quay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2752">&#34;The telegraph?&#34; they asked, without answering one of the thousand questions addressed to them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2753">The officer of the port conducted them to the telegraph-office through a concourse of spectators. </span>
      <span id="f2754">Blomsberry and Bronsfield entered, while the crowd crushed each other at the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2755">Some minutes later a fourfold telegram was sent out—the first to the Naval Secretary at Washington; the second to the Vice-President of the Gun Club, Baltimore; the third to the Hon. </span>
      <span id="f2756">J. </span>
      <span id="f2757">T. </span>
      <span id="f2758">Maston, Long&#39;s Peak, Rocky Mountains; the fourth to the Sub-Director of the Cambridge Observatory, Massachusetts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2759">It was worded as follows:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2760">&#34;In 20° 7&#39; north lat., and 41° 37&#39; west long., on the 12th of December,     at 17 past one in the morning, the projectile of the Columbiad fell         into the Pacific. </span>
      <span id="f2761">Send instructions.—Blomsberry, Commander         &#39;Susquehanna.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2762">Five minutes afterwards the whole town of San Francisco learned the news. </span>
      <span id="f2763">Before six in the evening the different States of the Union had heard the great catastrophe; and after midnight, by the cable, the whole of Europe knew the result of the great American experiment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2764">We will not attempt to picture the effect produced on the entire world by that unexpected denouement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2765">On receipt of the telegram the Naval Secretary telegraphed to the Susquehanna to wait in the bay of San Francisco without extinguishing her fires. </span>
      <span id="f2766">Day and night she must be ready to put to sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2767">The Cambridge Observatory called a special meeting; and, with that composure which distinguishes learned bodies in general, peacefully discussed the scientific bearings of the question. </span>
      <span id="f2768">At the Gun Club there was an explosion. </span>
      <span id="f2769">All the gunners were assembled. </span>
      <span id="f2770">Vice-President the Hon. </span>
      <span id="f2771">Wilcome was in the act of reading the premature despatch, in which J. </span>
      <span id="f2772">T. </span>
      <span id="f2773">Maston and Belfast announced that the projectile had just been seen in the gigantic reflector of Long&#39;s Peak, and also that it was held by lunar attraction, and was playing the part of under satellite to the lunar world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2774">We know the truth on that point.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2775">But on the arrival of Blomsberry&#39;s despatch, so decidedly contradicting J. </span>
      <span id="f2776">T. </span>
      <span id="f2777">Maston&#39;s telegram, two parties were formed in the bosom of the Gun Club. </span>
      <span id="f2778">On one side were those who admitted the fall of the projectile, and consequently the return of the travellers; on the other, those who believed in the observations of Long&#39;s Peak, concluded that the commander of the Susquehanna had made a mistake. </span>
      <span id="f2779">To the latter the pretended projectile was nothing but a meteor! </span>
      <span id="f2780">nothing but a meteor, a shooting globe, which in its fall had smashed the bows of the corvette. </span>
      <span id="f2781">It was difficult to answer this argument, for the speed with which it was animated must have made observation very difficult. </span>
      <span id="f2782">The commander of the Susquehanna and her officers might have made a mistake in all good faith; one argument however, was in their favour, namely, that if the projectile had fallen on the earth, its place of meeting with the terrestrial globe could only take place on this 27° north lat., and (taking into consideration the time that had elapsed, and the rotary motion of the earth) between the forty-first and the forty-second degree of west longitude. </span>
      <span id="f2783">In any case, it was decided in the Gun Club that Blomsberry brothers, Bilsby, and Major Elphinstone should go straight to San Francisco, and consult as to the means of raising the projectile from the depths of the ocean.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2784">These devoted men set off at once; and the railroad, which will soon cross the whole of central America, took them as far as St. </span>
      <span id="f2785">Louis, where the swift mail-coaches awaited them. </span>
      <span id="f2786">Almost at the same moment in which the Secretary of Marine, the Vice-President of the Gun Club, and the Sub-Director of the Observatory received the despatch from San Francisco, the Honourable J. </span>
      <span id="f2787">T. </span>
      <span id="f2788">Maston was undergoing the greatest excitement he had ever experienced in his life, an excitement which even the bursting of his pet gun, which had more than once nearly cost him his life, had not caused him. </span>
      <span id="f2789">We may remember that the Secretary of the Gun Club had started soon after the projectile (and almost as quickly) for the station in Long&#39;s Peak, in the Rocky Mountains, J. </span>
      <span id="f2790">Belfast, Director of the Cambridge Observatory, accompanying him. </span>
      <span id="f2791">Arrived there, the two friends had installed themselves at once, never quitting the summit of their enormous telescope. </span>
      <span id="f2792">We know that this gigantic instrument had been set up according to the reflecting system, called by the English &#34;front view.&#34; This arrangement subjected all objects to but one reflection, making the view consequently much clearer; the result was that, when they were taking observations, J. </span>
      <span id="f2793">T. </span>
      <span id="f2794">Maston and Belfast were placed in the upper part of the instrument and not in the lower, which they reached by a circular staircase, a masterpiece of lightness, while below them opened a metal well terminated by the metallic mirror, which measured 280 feet in depth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2795">It was on a narrow platform placed above the telescope that the two savants passed their existence, execrating the day which hid the moon from their eyes, and the clouds which obstinately veiled her during the night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2796">What, then, was their delight when, after some days of waiting, on the night of the 5th of December, they saw the vehicle which was bearing their friends into space! </span>
      <span id="f2797">To this delight succeeded a great deception, when, trusting to a cursory observation, they launched their first telegram to the world, erroneously affirming that the projectile had become a satellite of the moon, gravitating in an immutable orbit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2798">From that moment it had never shown itself to their eyes—a disappearance all the more easily explained, as it was then passing behind the moon&#39;s invisible disc; but when it was time for it to reappear on the visible disc, one may imagine the impatience of the fuming J. </span>
      <span id="f2799">T. </span>
      <span id="f2800">Maston and his not less impatient companion. </span>
      <span id="f2801">Each minute of the night they thought they saw the projectile once more, and they did not see it. </span>
      <span id="f2802">Hence constant discussions and violent disputes between them, Belfast affirming that the projectile could not be seen, J. </span>
      <span id="f2803">T. </span>
      <span id="f2804">Maston maintaining that &#34;it had put his eyes out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2805">&#34;It is the projectile!&#34; repeated J. </span>
      <span id="f2806">T. </span>
      <span id="f2807">Maston.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2808">&#34;No,&#34; answered Belfast; &#34;it is an avalanche detached from a lunar mountain.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2809">&#34;Well, we shall see it to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2810">&#34;No, we shall not see it any more. </span>
      <span id="f2811">It is carried into space.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2812">&#34;Yes!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2813">&#34;No!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2814">And at these moments, when contradictions rained like hail, the well-known irritability of the Secretary of the Gun Club constituted a permanent danger for the Honorable Belfast. </span>
      <span id="f2815">The existence of these two together would soon have become impossible; but an unforeseen event cut short their everlasting discussions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2816">During the night, from the 14th to the 15th of December, the two irreconcilable friends were busy observing the lunar disc, J. </span>
      <span id="f2817">T. </span>
      <span id="f2818">Maston abusing the learned Belfast as usual, who was by his side; the Secretary of the Gun Club maintaining for the thousandth time that he had just seen the projectile, and adding that he could see Michel Ardan&#39;s face looking through one of the scuttles, at the same time enforcing his argument by a series of gestures which his formidable hook rendered very unpleasant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2819">At this moment Belfast&#39;s servant appeared on the platform (it was ten at night) and gave him a despatch. </span>
      <span id="f2820">It was the commander of the &#34;Susquehanna&#39;s&#34; telegram.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2821">Belfast tore the envelope and read, and uttered a cry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2822">&#34;What!&#34; said J. </span>
      <span id="f2823">T. </span>
      <span id="f2824">Maston.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2825">&#34;The projectile!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2826">&#34;Well!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2827">&#34;Has fallen to the earth!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2828">Another cry, this time a perfect howl, answered him. </span>
      <span id="f2829">He turned towards J. </span>
      <span id="f2830">T. </span>
      <span id="f2831">Maston. </span>
      <span id="f2832">The unfortunate man, imprudently leaning over the metal tube, had disappeared in the immense telescope. </span>
      <span id="f2833">A fall of 280 feet! </span>
      <span id="f2834">Belfast, dismayed, rushed to the orifice of the reflector.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2835">He breathed. </span>
      <span id="f2836">J. </span>
      <span id="f2837">T. </span>
      <span id="f2838">Maston, caught by his metal hook was holding on by one of the rings which bound the telescope together, uttering fearful cries.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2839">Belfast called. </span>
      <span id="f2840">Help was brought, tackle was let down, and they hoisted up, not without some trouble, the imprudent Secretary of the Gun Club.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2841">He reappeared at the upper orifice without hurt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2842">&#34;Ah!&#34; said he, &#34;if I had broken the mirror?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2843">&#34;You would have paid for it,&#34; replied Belfast severely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2844">&#34;And that cursed projectile has fallen?&#34; asked J. </span>
      <span id="f2845">T. </span>
      <span id="f2846">Maston.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2847">&#34;Into the Pacific!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2848">&#34;Let us go!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2849">A quarter of an hour after the two savants were descending the declivity of the Rocky Mountains; and two days after, at the same time as their friends of the Gun Club, they arrived at San Francisco, having killed five horses on the road.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2850">Elphinstone, the brothers Blomsberry, and Bilsby rushed towards them on their arrival.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2851">&#34;What shall we do?&#34; they exclaimed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2852">&#34;Fish up the projectile,&#34; replied J. </span>
      <span id="f2853">T. </span>
      <span id="f2854">Maston, &#34;and the sooner the better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>