<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2855">CHAPTER XXII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2856">RECOVERED FROM THE SEA.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2857">The spot where the projectile sank under the waves was exactly known; but machinery to grasp it and bring it to the surface of the ocean was still wanting. </span>
      <span id="f2858">It must first be invented, then made. </span>
      <span id="f2859">American engineers could not be troubled with such trifles. </span>
      <span id="f2860">The grappling-irons once fixed, by their help they were sure to raise it in spite of its weight, which was lessened by the density of the liquid in which it was plunged.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2861">But fishing-up the projectile was not the only thing to be thought of. </span>
      <span id="f2862">They must act promptly in the interest of the travellers. </span>
      <span id="f2863">No one doubted that they were still living.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2864">&#34;Yes,&#34; repeated J. </span>
      <span id="f2865">T. </span>
      <span id="f2866">Maston incessantly, whose confidence gained over everybody, &#34;our friends are clever people, and they cannot have fallen like simpletons. </span>
      <span id="f2867">They are alive, quite alive; but we must make haste if we wish to find them so. </span>
      <span id="f2868">Food and water do not trouble me; they have enough for a long while. </span>
      <span id="f2869">But air, air, that is what they will soon want; so quick, quick!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2870">And they did go quick. </span>
      <span id="f2871">They fitted up the Susquehanna for her new destination. </span>
      <span id="f2872">Her powerful machinery was brought to bear upon the hauling-chains. </span>
      <span id="f2873">The aluminium projectile only weighed 19,250 lbs., a weight very inferior to that of the transatlantic cable which had been drawn up under similar conditions. </span>
      <span id="f2874">The only difficulty was in fishing-up a cylindro-conical projectile, the walls of which were so smooth as to offer no hold for the hooks. </span>
      <span id="f2875">On that account Engineer Murchison hastened to San Francisco, and had some enormous grappling-irons fixed on an automatic system, which would never let the projectile go if it once succeeded in seizing it in its powerful claws. </span>
      <span id="f2876">Diving-dresses were also prepared, which through this impervious covering allowed the divers to observe the bottom of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f2877">He also had put on board an apparatus of compressed air very cleverly designed. </span>
      <span id="f2878">There were perfect chambers pierced with scuttles, which, with water let into certain compartments, could draw it down into great depths. </span>
      <span id="f2879">These apparatuses were at San Francisco, where they had been used in the construction of a submarine breakwater; and very fortunately it was so, for there was no time to construct any. </span>
      <span id="f2880">But in spite of the perfection of the machinery, in spite of the ingenuity of the savants entrusted with the use of them, the success of the operation was far from being certain. </span>
      <span id="f2881">How great were the chances against them, the projectile being 20,000 feet under the water! </span>
      <span id="f2882">And if even it was brought to the surface, how would the travellers have borne the terrible shock which 20,000 feet of water had perhaps not sufficiently broken? </span>
      <span id="f2883">At any rate they must act quickly. </span>
      <span id="f2884">J. </span>
      <span id="f2885">T. </span>
      <span id="f2886">Maston hurried the workmen day and night. </span>
      <span id="f2887">He was ready to don the diving-dress himself, or try the air apparatus, in order to reconnoitre the situation of his courageous friends.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2888">But in spite of all diligence displayed in preparing the different engines, in spite of the considerable sum placed at the disposal of the Gun Club by the Government of the Union, five long days (five centuries!) elapsed before the preparations were complete. </span>
      <span id="f2889">During this time public opinion was excited to the highest pitch. </span>
      <span id="f2890">Telegrams were exchanged incessantly throughout the entire world by means of wires and electric cables. </span>
      <span id="f2891">The saving of Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan was an international affair. </span>
      <span id="f2892">Every one who had subscribed to the Gun Club was directly interested in the welfare of the travellers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2893">At length the hauling-chains, the air-chambers, and the automatic grappling-irons were put on board. </span>
      <span id="f2894">J. </span>
      <span id="f2895">T. </span>
      <span id="f2896">Maston, Engineer Murchison, and the delegates of the Gun Club, were already in their cabins. </span>
      <span id="f2897">They had but to start, which they did on the 21st of December, at eight o&#39;clock at night, the corvette meeting with a beautiful sea, a north-easterly wind, and rather sharp cold. </span>
      <span id="f2898">The whole population of San Francisco was gathered on the quay, greatly excited but silent, reserving their hurrahs for the return. </span>
      <span id="f2899">Steam was fully up, and the screw of the Susquehanna carried them briskly out of the bay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2900">It is needless to relate the conversations on board between the officers, sailors, and passengers. </span>
      <span id="f2901">All these men had but one thought. </span>
      <span id="f2902">All these hearts beat under the same emotion. </span>
      <span id="f2903">Whilst they were hastening to help them, what were Barbicane and his companions doing? </span>
      <span id="f2904">What had become of them? </span>
      <span id="f2905">Were they able to attempt any bold maneuver to regain their liberty? </span>
      <span id="f2906">None could say. </span>
      <span id="f2907">The truth is that every attempt must have failed! </span>
      <span id="f2908">Immersed nearly four miles under the ocean, this metal prison defied every effort of its prisoners.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2909">On the 23rd inst., at eight in the morning, after a rapid passage, the Susquehanna was due at the fatal spot. </span>
      <span id="f2910">They must wait till twelve to take the reckoning exactly. </span>
      <span id="f2911">The buoy to which the sounding line had been lashed had not yet been recognized.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2912">At twelve, Captain Blomsberry, assisted by his officers who superintended the observations, took the reckoning in the presence of the delegates of the Gun Club. </span>
      <span id="f2913">Then there was a moment of anxiety. </span>
      <span id="f2914">Her position decided, the Susquehanna was found to be some minutes to westward of the spot where the projectile had disappeared beneath the waves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2915">The ship&#39;s course was then changed so as to reach this exact point.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2916">At forty-seven minutes past twelve they reached the buoy, it was in perfect condition, and must have shifted but little.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2917">&#34;At last!&#34; exclaimed J. </span>
      <span id="f2918">T. </span>
      <span id="f2919">Maston.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2920">&#34;Shall we begin?&#34; asked Captain Blomsberry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2921">&#34;Without losing a second.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2922">Every precaution was taken to keep the corvette almost completely motionless. </span>
      <span id="f2923">Before trying to seize the projectile, Engineer Murchison wanted to find its exact position at the bottom of the ocean. </span>
      <span id="f2924">The submarine apparatus destined for this expedition was supplied with air. </span>
      <span id="f2925">The working of these engines was not without danger, for at 20,000 feet below the surface of the water, and under such great pressure, they were exposed to fracture, the consequences of which would be dreadful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2926">J. </span>
      <span id="f2927">T. </span>
      <span id="f2928">Maston, the Brothers Blomsberry, and Engineer Murchison, without heeding these dangers, took their places in the air-chamber. </span>
      <span id="f2929">The commander, posted on his bridge, superintended the operation, ready to stop or haul in the chains on the slightest signal. </span>
      <span id="f2930">The screw had been shipped, and the whole power of the machinery collected on the capstan would have quickly drawn the apparatus on board. </span>
      <span id="f2931">The descent began at twenty-five minutes past one at night, and the chamber, drawn under by the reservoirs full of water, disappeared from the surface of the ocean.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2932">The emotion of the officers and sailors on board was now divided between the prisoners in the projectile and the prisoners in the submarine apparatus. </span>
      <span id="f2933">As to the latter, they forgot themselves, and, glued to the windows of the scuttles, attentively watched the liquid mass through which they were passing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2934">The descent was rapid. </span>
      <span id="f2935">At seventeen minutes past two, J. </span>
      <span id="f2936">T. </span>
      <span id="f2937">Maston and his companions had reached the bottom of the Pacific; but they saw nothing but an arid desert, no longer animated by either fauna or flora. </span>
      <span id="f2938">By the light of their lamps, furnished with powerful reflectors, they could see the dark beds of the ocean for a considerable extent of view, but the projectile was nowhere to be seen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2939">The impatience of these bold divers cannot be described, and having an electrical communication with the corvette, they made a signal already agreed upon, and for the space of a mile the Susquehanna moved their chamber along some yards above the bottom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2940">Thus they explored the whole submarine plain, deceived at every turn by optical illusions which almost broke their hearts. </span>
      <span id="f2941">Here a rock, there a projection from the ground, seemed to be the much-sought-for projectile; but their mistake was soon discovered, and then they were in despair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2942">&#34;But where are they? </span>
      <span id="f2943">where are they?&#34; cried J. </span>
      <span id="f2944">T. </span>
      <span id="f2945">Maston. </span>
      <span id="f2946">And the poor man called loudly upon Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan, as if his unfortunate friends could either hear or answer him through such an impenetrable medium! </span>
      <span id="f2947">The search continued under these conditions until the vitiated air compelled the divers to ascend.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2948">The hauling in began about six in the evening, and was not ended before midnight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2949">&#34;To-morrow,&#34; said J. </span>
      <span id="f2950">T. </span>
      <span id="f2951">Maston, as he set foot on the bridge of the corvette.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2952">&#34;Yes,&#34; answered Captain Blomsberry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2953">&#34;And on another spot?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2954">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2955">J. </span>
      <span id="f2956">T. </span>
      <span id="f2957">Maston did not doubt of their final success, but his companions, no longer upheld by the excitement of the first hours, understood all the difficulty of the enterprise. </span>
      <span id="f2958">What seemed easy at San Francisco, seemed here in the wide ocean almost impossible. </span>
      <span id="f2959">The chances of success diminished in rapid proportion; and it was from chance alone that the meeting with the projectile might be expected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2960">The next day, the 24th, in spite of the fatigue of the previous day, the operation was renewed. </span>
      <span id="f2961">The corvette advanced some minutes to westward, and the apparatus, provided with air, bore the same explorers to the depths of the ocean.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2962">The whole day passed in fruitless research; the bed of the sea was a desert. </span>
      <span id="f2963">The 25th brought no other result, nor the 26th.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2964">It was disheartening. </span>
      <span id="f2965">They thought of those unfortunates shut up in the projectile for twenty-six days. </span>
      <span id="f2966">Perhaps at that moment they were experiencing the first approach of suffocation; that is, if they had escaped the dangers of their fall. </span>
      <span id="f2967">The air was spent, and doubtless with the air all their _morale_.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2968">&#34;The air, possibly,&#34; answered J. </span>
      <span id="f2969">T. </span>
      <span id="f2970">Maston resolutely, &#34;but their _morale_ never!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2971">On the 28th, after two more days of search, all hope was gone. </span>
      <span id="f2972">This projectile was but an atom in the immensity of the ocean. </span>
      <span id="f2973">They must give up all idea of finding it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2974">But J. </span>
      <span id="f2975">T. </span>
      <span id="f2976">Maston would not hear of going away. </span>
      <span id="f2977">He would not abandon the place without at least discovering the tomb of his friends. </span>
      <span id="f2978">But Commander Blomsberry could no longer persist, and in spite of the exclamations of the worthy Secretary, was obliged to give the order to sail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2979">On the 29th of December, at nine a.m., the &#34;Susquehanna,&#34; heading N.E., resumed her course to the bay of San Francisco.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2980">It was ten in the morning; the corvette was under half steam, as if regretting to leave the spot where the catastrophe had taken place, when a sailor, perched on the maintop gallant crosstrees, watching the sea, cried suddenly,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2981">&#34;A buoy on the lee bow!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2982">The officers looked in the direction indicated, and by the help of their glasses saw that the object signalled had the appearance of one of those buoys which are used to mark the passages of bays or rivers. </span>
      <span id="f2983">But, singularly to say, a flag floating on the wind surmounted its cone, which emerged five or six feet out of water. </span>
      <span id="f2984">This buoy shone under the rays of the sun as if it had been made of plates of silver. </span>
      <span id="f2985">Commander Blomsberry, J. </span>
      <span id="f2986">T. </span>
      <span id="f2987">Maston, and the delegates of the Gun Club were mounted on the bridge, examining this object straying at random on the waves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2988">All looked with feverish anxiety, but in silence. </span>
      <span id="f2989">None dared give expression to the thoughts which came to the minds of all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2990">The corvette approached to within two cables&#39; lengths of the object.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2991">A shudder ran through the whole crew. </span>
      <span id="f2992">That flag was the American flag!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2993">At this moment a perfect howling was heard; it was the brave J. </span>
      <span id="f2994">T. </span>
      <span id="f2995">Maston who had just fallen all in a heap. </span>
      <span id="f2996">Forgetting on the one hand that his right arm had been replaced by an iron hook, and on the other that a simple gutta-percha cap covered his brain-box, he had given himself a formidable blow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2997">They hurried towards him, picked him up, restored him to life. </span>
      <span id="f2998">And what were his first words?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2999">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f3000">trebly brutes! </span>
      <span id="f3001">quadruply idiots! </span>
      <span id="f3002">quintuply boobies that we are!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3003">&#34;What is it?&#34; exclaimed every one around him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3004">&#34;What is it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3005">&#34;Come, speak!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3006">&#34;It is, simpletons,&#34; howled the terrible Secretary, &#34;it is that the projectile only weighs 19,250 lbs.!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3007">&#34;Well?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3008">&#34;And that it displaces twenty-eight tons, or in other words 56,000 lbs., and that consequently _it floats!_&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3009">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f3010">what stress the worthy man laid on the verb &#34;float!&#34; And it was true! </span>
      <span id="f3011">All, yes! </span>
      <span id="f3012">all these savants had forgotten this fundamental law, namely, that on account of its specific lightness, the projectile, after having been drawn by its fall to the greatest depths of the ocean, must naturally return to the surface. </span>
      <span id="f3013">And now it was floating quietly at the mercy of the waves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3014">The boats were put to sea. </span>
      <span id="f3015">J. </span>
      <span id="f3016">T. </span>
      <span id="f3017">Maston and his friends had rushed into them! </span>
      <span id="f3018">Excitement was at its height! </span>
      <span id="f3019">Every heart beat loudly whilst they advanced to the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f3020">What did it contain? </span>
      <span id="f3021">Living or dead? </span>
      <span id="f3022">Living, yes! </span>
      <span id="f3023">living, at least unless death had struck Barbicane and his two friends since they had hoisted the flag. </span>
      <span id="f3024">Profound silence reigned on the boats. </span>
      <span id="f3025">All were breathless. </span>
      <span id="f3026">Eyes no longer saw. </span>
      <span id="f3027">One of the scuttles of the projectile was open. </span>
      <span id="f3028">Some pieces of glass remained in the frame, showing that it had been broken. </span>
      <span id="f3029">This scuttle was actually five feet above the water.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3030">A boat came alongside, that of J. </span>
      <span id="f3031">T. </span>
      <span id="f3032">Maston, and J. </span>
      <span id="f3033">T. </span>
      <span id="f3034">Maston rushed to the broken window.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3035">At that moment they heard a clear and merry voice, the voice of Michel Ardan, exclaiming in an accent of triumph,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3036">&#34;White all, Barbicane, white all!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3037">Barbicane, Michel Ardan, and Nicholl were playing at dominoes!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>