<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f3038">CHAPTER XXIII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3039">THE END</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3040">We may remember the intense sympathy which had accompanied the travellers on their departure. </span>
      <span id="f3041">If at the beginning of the enterprise they had excited such emotion both in the old and new world, with what enthusiasm would they be received on their return! </span>
      <span id="f3042">The millions of spectators which had beset the peninsula of Florida, would they not rush to meet these sublime adventurers? </span>
      <span id="f3043">Those legions of strangers, hurrying from all parts of the globe towards the American shores, would they leave the Union without having seen Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan? </span>
      <span id="f3044">No! </span>
      <span id="f3045">and the ardent passion of the public was bound to respond worthily to the greatness of the enterprise. </span>
      <span id="f3046">Human creatures who had left the terrestrial sphere, and returned after this strange voyage into celestial space, could not fail to be received as the prophet Elias would be if he came back to earth. </span>
      <span id="f3047">To see them first, and then to hear them, such was the universal longing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3048">Barbicane, Michel Ardan, Nicholl, and the delegates of the Gun Club, returning without delay to Baltimore, were received with indescribable enthusiasm. </span>
      <span id="f3049">The notes of President Barbicane&#39;s voyage were ready to be given to the public. </span>
      <span id="f3050">The _New York Herald_ bought the manuscript at a price not yet known, but which must have been very high. </span>
      <span id="f3051">Indeed, during the publication of &#34;A Journey to the Moon,&#34; the sale of this paper amounted to five millions of copies. </span>
      <span id="f3052">Three days after the return of the travellers to the earth, the slightest detail of their expedition was known. </span>
      <span id="f3053">There remained nothing more but to see the heroes of this superhuman enterprise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3054">The expedition of Barbicane and his friends round the moon had enabled them to correct the many admitted theories regarding the terrestrial satellite. </span>
      <span id="f3055">These savants had observed _de visu_, and under particular circumstances. </span>
      <span id="f3056">They knew what systems should be rejected, what retained with regard to the formation of that orb, its origin, its habitability. </span>
      <span id="f3057">Its past, present, and future had even given up their last secrets. </span>
      <span id="f3058">Who could advance objections against conscientious observers, who at less than twenty-four miles distance had marked that curious mountain of Tycho, the strangest system of lunar orography? </span>
      <span id="f3059">How answer those savants whose sight had penetrated the abyss of Pluto&#39;s circle? </span>
      <span id="f3060">How contradict those bold ones whom the chances of their enterprise had borne over that invisible face of the disc, which no human eye until then had ever seen? </span>
      <span id="f3061">It was now their turn to impose some limit on that Selenographic science, which had reconstructed the lunar world as Cuvier did the skeleton of a fossil, and say, &#34;The moon _was_ this, a habitable world, inhabited before the earth! </span>
      <span id="f3062">The moon _is_ that, a world uninhabitable, and now uninhabited.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3063">To celebrate the return of its most illustrious member and his two companions, the Gun Club decided upon giving a banquet, but a banquet worthy of the conquerors, worthy of the American people, and under such conditions that all the inhabitants of the Union could directly take part in it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3064">All the head lines of railroads in the State were joined by flying rails; and on all the platforms, lined with the same flags, and decorated with the same ornaments, were tables laid and all served alike. </span>
      <span id="f3065">At certain hours, successively calculated, marked by electric clocks which beat the seconds at the same time, the population were invited to take their place at the banquet tables. </span>
      <span id="f3066">For four days, from the 5th to the 9th of January, the trains were stopped as they are on Sundays on the railways of the United States, and every road was open. </span>
      <span id="f3067">One engine only at full speed, drawing a triumphal carriage, had the right of travelling for those four days on the railroads of the United States. </span>
      <span id="f3068">The engine was manned by a driver and a stoker, and bore, by special favour, the Hon. </span>
      <span id="f3069">J. </span>
      <span id="f3070">T. </span>
      <span id="f3071">Maston, Secretary of the Gun Club. </span>
      <span id="f3072">The carriage was reserved for President Barbicane, Colonel Nicholl, and Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f3073">At the whistle of the driver, amid the hurrahs, and all the admiring vociferations of the American language, the train left the platform of Baltimore. </span>
      <span id="f3074">It travelled at a speed of 160 miles in the hour. </span>
      <span id="f3075">But what was this speed compared with that which had carried the three heroes from the mouth of the Columbiad?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3076">Thus they sped from one town to the other, finding whole populations at table on their road, saluting them with the same acclamations, lavishing the same bravos! </span>
      <span id="f3077">They travelled in this way through the east of the Union, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, Maine, and New Hampshire; the north and the west by New York, Ohio, Michigan, and Wisconsin; returning to the south by Illinois, Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana; they went to the southeast by Alabama and Florida, going up by Georgia and the Carolinas, visiting the centre by Tennessee, Kentucky, Virginia, and Indiana, and, after quitting the Washington station, re-entered Baltimore, where for four days one would have thought that the United States of America were seated at one immense banquet, saluting them simultaneously with the same hurrahs! </span>
      <span id="f3078">The apotheosis was worthy of these three heroes whom fable would have placed in the rank of demigods.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3079">And now will this attempt, unprecedented in the annals of travels, lead to any practical result? </span>
      <span id="f3080">Will direct communication with the moon ever be established? </span>
      <span id="f3081">Will they ever lay the foundation of a travelling service through the solar world? </span>
      <span id="f3082">Will they go from one planet to another, from Jupiter to Mercury, and after awhile from one star to another, from the Polar to Sirius? </span>
      <span id="f3083">Will this means of locomotion allow us to visit those suns which swarm in the firmament?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3084">To such questions no answer can be given. </span>
      <span id="f3085">But knowing the bold ingenuity of the Anglo-Saxon race, no one would be astonished if the Americans seek to make some use of President Barbicane&#39;s attempt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3086">Thus, some time after the return of the travellers, the public received with marked favour the announcement of a company, limited, with a capital of a hundred million of dollars, divided into a hundred thousand shares of a thousand dollars each, under the name of the &#34;_National Company of Interstellary Communication._&#34; President Barbicane; Vice-president, Captain Nicholl; Secretary, J. </span>
      <span id="f3087">T. </span>
      <span id="f3088">Maston; Director of Movements, Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3089">And as it is part of the American temperament to foresee everything in business, even failure, the Honourable Harry Trolloppe, judge commissioner, and Francis Drayton, magistrate, were nominated beforehand!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>