<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2051">CHAPTER XXV.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2052">FINAL DETAILS.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2053">It was the 22nd of November; the departure was to take place in ten days. </span>
      <span id="f2054">One operation alone remained to be accomplished to bring all to a happy termination; an operation delicate and perilous, requiring infinite precautions, and against the success of which Captain Nicholl had laid his third bet. </span>
      <span id="f2055">It was, in fact, nothing less than the loading of the Columbiad, and the introduction into it of 400,000 pounds of gun-cotton. </span>
      <span id="f2056">Nicholl had thought, not perhaps without reason, that the handling of such formidable quantities of pyroxyle would, in all probability, involve a grave catastrophe; and at any rate, that this immense mass of eminently inflammable matter would inevitably ignite when submitted to the pressure of the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2057">There were indeed dangers accruing as before from the carelessness of the Americans, but Barbicane had set his heart on success, and took all possible precautions. </span>
      <span id="f2058">In the first place, he was very careful as to the transportation of the gun-cotton to Stones Hill. </span>
      <span id="f2059">He had it conveyed in small quantities, carefully packed in sealed cases. </span>
      <span id="f2060">These were brought by rail from Tampa Town to the camp, and from thence were taken to the Columbiad by barefooted workmen, who deposited them in their places by means of cranes placed at the orifice of the cannon. </span>
      <span id="f2061">No steam-engine was permitted to work, and every fire was extinguished within two miles of the works.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2062">Even in November they feared to work by day, lest the sun&#39;s rays acting on the gun-cotton might lead to unhappy results. </span>
      <span id="f2063">This led to their working at night, by light produced in a vacuum by means of Rühmkorff&#39;s apparatus, which threw an artificial brightness into the depths of the Columbiad. </span>
      <span id="f2064">There the cartridges were arranged with the utmost regularity, connected by a metallic thread, destined to communicate to them all simultaneously the electric spark, by which means this mass of gun-cotton was eventually to be ignited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2065">By the 28th of November 800 cartridges had been placed in the bottom of the Columbiad. </span>
      <span id="f2066">So far the operation had been successful! </span>
      <span id="f2067">But what confusion, what anxieties, what struggles were undergone by President Barbicane! </span>
      <span id="f2068">In vain had he refused admission to Stones Hill; every day the inquisitive neighbours scaled the palisades, some even carrying their imprudence to the point of smoking while surrounded by bales of gun-cotton. </span>
      <span id="f2069">Barbicane was in a perpetual state of alarm. </span>
      <span id="f2070">J. </span>
      <span id="f2071">T. </span>
      <span id="f2072">Maston seconded him to the best of his ability, by giving vigorous chase to the intruders, and carefully picking up the still lighted cigar ends which the Yankees threw about. </span>
      <span id="f2073">A somewhat difficult task! </span>
      <span id="f2074">seeing that more than 300,000 persons were gathered round the enclosure. </span>
      <span id="f2075">Michel Ardan had volunteered to superintend the transport of the cartridges to the mouth of the Columbiad; but the president, having surprised him with an enormous cigar in his mouth, while he was hunting out the rash spectators to whom he himself offered so dangerous an example, saw that he could not trust this fearless smoker, and was therefore obliged to mount a special guard over him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2076">At last, Providence being propitious, this wonderful loading came to a happy termination, Captain Nicholl&#39;s third bet being thus lost. </span>
      <span id="f2077">It remained now to introduce the projectile into the Columbiad, and to place it on its soft bed of gun-cotton.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2078">But before doing this, all those things necessary for the journey had to be carefully arranged in the projectile-vehicle. </span>
      <span id="f2079">These necessaries were numerous; and had Ardan been allowed to follow his own wishes, there would have been no space remaining for the travellers. </span>
      <span id="f2080">It is impossible to conceive of half the things this charming Frenchman wished to convey to the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2081">A veritable stock of useless trifles! </span>
      <span id="f2082">But Barbicane interfered and refused admission to anything not absolutely needed. </span>
      <span id="f2083">Several thermometers, barometers, and telescopes were packed in the instrument case.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2084">The travellers being desirous of examining the moon carefully during their voyage, in order to facilitate their studies, they took with them Bœer and Moedler&#39;s excellent _Mappa Selenographica_, a masterpiece of patience and observation, which they hoped would enable them to identify those physical features in the moon, with which they were acquainted. </span>
      <span id="f2085">This map reproduced with scrupulous fidelity the smallest details of the lunar surface which faces the earth; the mountains, valleys, craters, peaks, and ridges were all represented, with their exact dimensions, relative positions, and names; from the mountains Doërfel and Leibnitz on the eastern side of the disc, to the _Mare frigoris_ of the North Pole.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2086">They took also three rifles and three fowling-pieces, and a large quantity of balls, shot, and powder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2087">&#34;We cannot tell whom we shall have to deal with,&#34; said Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f2088">&#34;Men or beasts may possibly object to our visit. </span>
      <span id="f2089">It is only wise to take all precautions.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2090">These defensive weapons were accompanied by pickaxes, crowbars, saws, and other useful implements, not to mention clothing adapted to every temperature, from that of the polar regions to that of the torrid zone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2091">Ardan wished to convey a number of animals of different sorts (not indeed a pair of every known species), as he could not see the necessity of acclimatizing serpents, tigers, alligators, or any other noxious beasts in the moon. </span>
      <span id="f2092">&#34;Nevertheless,&#34; he said to Barbicane, &#34;some valuable and useful beasts, bullocks, cows, horses, and donkeys, would bear the journey very well, and would also be very useful to us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2093">&#34;I dare say, my dear Ardan,&#34; replied the president, &#34;but our projectile-vehicle is no Noah&#39;s ark, from which it differs both in dimensions and object. </span>
      <span id="f2094">Let us confine ourselves to possibilities.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2095">After a prolonged discussion, it was agreed that the travellers should restrict themselves to a sporting-dog belonging to Nicholl, and to a large Newfoundland. </span>
      <span id="f2096">Several packets of seeds were also included among the necessaries. </span>
      <span id="f2097">Michel Ardan, indeed, was anxious to add some sacks full of earth to sow them in; as it was, he took a dozen shrubs carefully wrapped up in straw to plant in the moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2098">The important question of provisions still remained; it being necessary to provide against the possibility of their finding the moon absolutely barren. </span>
      <span id="f2099">Barbicane managed so successfully, that he supplied them with sufficient rations for a year. </span>
      <span id="f2100">These consisted of preserved meats and vegetables, reduced by strong hydraulic pressure to the smallest possible dimensions. </span>
      <span id="f2101">They were also supplied with brandy, and took water enough for two months, being confident, from astronomical observations, that there was no lack of water on the moon&#39;s surface. </span>
      <span id="f2102">As to provisions, doubtless the inhabitants of the _earth_ would find nourishment somewhere in the _moon_. </span>
      <span id="f2103">Ardan never questioned this; indeed, had he done so, he would never have undertaken the journey.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2104">&#34;Besides,&#34; he said one day to his friends, &#34;we shall not be completely abandoned by our terrestrial friends; they will take care not to forget us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2105">&#34;No, indeed!&#34; replied J. </span>
      <span id="f2106">T. </span>
      <span id="f2107">Maston.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2108">&#34;What do you mean?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2109">&#34;Nothing would be simpler,&#34; replied Ardan; &#34;the Columbiad will be always there. </span>
      <span id="f2110">Well! </span>
      <span id="f2111">whenever the moon is in a favourable condition as to the zenith, if not to the perigee, that is to say about once a year, could you not send us a shell packed with provisions, which we might expect on some appointed day?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2112">&#34;Hurrah! </span>
      <span id="f2113">hurrah!&#34; cried J. </span>
      <span id="f2114">T. </span>
      <span id="f2115">Maston; &#34;what an ingenious fellow! </span>
      <span id="f2116">what a splendid idea! </span>
      <span id="f2117">Indeed, my good friends, we shall not forget you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2118">&#34;I shall reckon upon you! </span>
      <span id="f2119">Then, you see, we shall receive news regularly from the earth, and we shall indeed be stupid if we hit upon no plan for communicating with our good friends here!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2120">These words inspired such confidence, that Michel Ardan carried all the Gun Club with him in his enthusiasm. </span>
      <span id="f2121">What he said seemed so simple and so easy, so sure of success, that none could be so sordidly attached to this earth as to hesitate to follow the three travellers on their lunar expedition.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2122">All being ready at last, it remained to place the projectile in the Columbiad, an operation abundantly accompanied by dangers and difficulties.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2123">The enormous shell was conveyed to the summit of Stones Hill. </span>
      <span id="f2124">There, powerful cranes raised it, and held it suspended over the mouth of the cylinder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2125">It was a fearful moment! </span>
      <span id="f2126">What if the chains should break under its enormous weight? </span>
      <span id="f2127">The sudden fall of such a body would inevitably cause the gun-cotton to explode!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2128">Fortunately this did not happen; and some hours later the projectile-vehicle descended gently into the heart of the cannon and rested on its couch of pyroxyle, a veritable bed of explosive eider-down. </span>
      <span id="f2129">Its pressure had no result, other than the more effectual ramming down of the charge of the Columbiad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2130">&#34;I have lost,&#34; said the Captain, who forthwith paid President Barbicane the sum of 3000 dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2131">Barbicane did not wish to accept the money from one of his fellow-travellers, but gave way at last before the determination of Nicholl, who wished before leaving the earth to fulfil all his engagements.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2132">&#34;Now,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;I have only one thing more to wish for you, my brave Captain.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2133">&#34;What is that?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2134">&#34;It is that you may lose your two other bets! </span>
      <span id="f2135">Then we shall be sure not to be stopped on our journey!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>