<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2136">CHAPTER XXVI.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2137">FIRE!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2138">The first of December had arrived! </span>
      <span id="f2139">the fatal day! </span>
      <span id="f2140">for, if the projectile were not discharged that very night at 10h. </span>
      <span id="f2141">46m. </span>
      <span id="f2142">40s. </span>
      <span id="f2143">p.m., more than eighteen years must roll by before the moon would again present herself under the same conditions of zenith and perigee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2144">The weather was magnificent. </span>
      <span id="f2145">Despite the approach of winter, the sun shone brightly, and bathed in its radiant light that earth which three of its denizens were about to abandon for a new world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2146">How many persons lost their rest on the night which preceded this long-expected day! </span>
      <span id="f2147">All hearts beat with disquietude, save only the heart of Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f2148">That imperturbable personage came and went with his habitual business-like air, while nothing whatever denoted that any unusual matter preoccupied his mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2149">After dawn, an innumerable multitude covered the prairie which extends, as far as the eye can reach, round Stones Hill. </span>
      <span id="f2150">Every quarter of an hour the railway brought fresh accessions of sightseers; and, according to the statement of the _Tampa Town Observer_, not less than five millions of spectators thronged the soil of Florida.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2151">For a whole month previously, the mass of these persons had bivouacked round the enclosure, and laid the foundations for a town which was afterwards called &#34;Ardan&#39;s Town.&#34; The whole plain was covered with huts, cottages, and tents. </span>
      <span id="f2152">Every nation under the sun was represented there; and every language might be heard spoken at the same time. </span>
      <span id="f2153">It was a perfect Babel re-enacted. </span>
      <span id="f2154">All the various classes of American society were mingled together in terms of absolute equality. </span>
      <span id="f2155">Bankers, farmers, sailors, cotton-planters, brokers, merchants, watermen, magistrates, elbowed each other in the most free-and-easy way. </span>
      <span id="f2156">Louisiana Creoles fraternised with farmers from Indiana; Kentucky and Tennessee gentlemen and haughty Virginians conversed with trappers and the half-savages of the lakes and butchers from Cincinnati. </span>
      <span id="f2157">Broad-brimmed white hats and Panamas, blue cotton trowsers, light coloured stockings, cambric frills, were all here displayed; while upon shirt-fronts, wristbands, and neckties, upon every finger, even upon the very _ears_, they wore an assortment of rings, shirt-pins, brooches, and trinkets, of which the value only equalled the execrable taste. </span>
      <span id="f2158">Women, children, and servants, in equally expensive dress, surrounded their husbands, fathers, or masters, who resembled the patriarchs of tribes in the midst of their immense households.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2159">At meal-times, all fell to work upon the dishes peculiar to the Southern States, and consumed with an appetite that threatened speedy exhaustion of the victualling powers of Florida, fricasseed frogs, stuffed monkey, fish chowder, underdone &#39;possum, and raccoon steaks. </span>
      <span id="f2160">And as for the liquors which accompanied this indigestible repast! </span>
      <span id="f2161">The shouts, the vociferations that resounded through the bars and taverns decorated with glasses, tankards, and bottles of marvellous shape, mortars for pounding sugar, and bundles of straws! </span>
      <span id="f2162">&#34;Mint-julep!&#34; roars one of the barmen; &#34;Claret sangaree!&#34; shouts another; &#34;Cocktail!&#34; &#34;Brandy-smash!&#34; &#34;Real mint-julep in the new style!&#34; All these cries intermingled produced a bewildering and deafening hubbub.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2163">But on this day, 1st December, such sounds were rare. </span>
      <span id="f2164">No one thought of eating or drinking, and at four p.m. </span>
      <span id="f2165">there were vast numbers of spectators who had not even taken their customary lunch! </span>
      <span id="f2166">And, a still more significant fact, even the national passion for play seemed quelled for the time under the general excitement of the hour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2167">Up till nightfall, a dull, noiseless agitation, such as precedes great catastrophes, ran through the anxious multitude. </span>
      <span id="f2168">An indescribable uneasiness pervaded all minds, an indefinable sensation which oppressed the heart. </span>
      <span id="f2169">Every one wished it was over.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2170">However, about seven o&#39;clock, the heavy silence was dissipated. </span>
      <span id="f2171">The moon rose above the horizon. </span>
      <span id="f2172">Millions of hurrahs hailed her appearance. </span>
      <span id="f2173">She was punctual to the rendezvous, and shouts of welcome greeted her on all sides, as her pale beams shone gracefully in the clear heavens. </span>
      <span id="f2174">At this moment the three intrepid travellers appeared. </span>
      <span id="f2175">This was the signal for renewed cries of still greater intensity. </span>
      <span id="f2176">Instantly the vast assemblage, as with one accord, struck up the national hymn of the United States, and &#34;Yankee Doodle,&#34; sung by five millions of hearty throats, rose like a roaring tempest to the farthest limits of the atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f2177">Then a profound silence reigned throughout the crowd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2178">The Frenchman and the two Americans had by this time entered the enclosure reserved in the centre of the multitude. </span>
      <span id="f2179">They were accompanied by the members of the Gun Club, and by deputations sent from all the European Observatories. </span>
      <span id="f2180">Barbicane, cool and collected, was giving his final directions. </span>
      <span id="f2181">Nicholl, with compressed lips, his arms crossed behind his back, walked with a firm and measured step. </span>
      <span id="f2182">Michel Ardan, always easy, dressed in thorough traveller&#39;s costume, leathern gaiters on his legs, pouch by his side, in loose velvet suit, cigar in mouth, was full of inexhaustible gaiety, laughing, joking, playing pranks with J. </span>
      <span id="f2183">T. </span>
      <span id="f2184">Maston. </span>
      <span id="f2185">In one word, he was the thorough &#34;Frenchman&#34; (and worse, a &#34;Parisian&#34;) to the last moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2186">Ten o&#39;clock struck! </span>
      <span id="f2187">The moment had arrived for taking their places in the projectile! </span>
      <span id="f2188">The necessary operations for the descent, and the subsequent removal of the cranes and scaffolding that inclined over the mouth of the Columbiad, required a certain period of time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2189">Barbicane had regulated his chronometer to the tenth part of a second by that of Murchison the engineer, who was charged with the duty of firing the gun by means of an electric spark. </span>
      <span id="f2190">Thus the travellers enclosed within the projectile were enabled to follow with their eyes the impassive needle which marked the precise moment of their departure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2191">The moment had arrived for saying &#34;Good-bye!&#34; The scene was a touching one. </span>
      <span id="f2192">Despite his feverish gaiety, even Michel Ardan was touched. </span>
      <span id="f2193">J. </span>
      <span id="f2194">T. </span>
      <span id="f2195">Maston had found in his own dry eyes one ancient tear, which he had doubtless reserved for the occasion. </span>
      <span id="f2196">He dropped it on the forehead of his dear president.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2197">&#34;Can I not go?&#34; he said, &#34;there is still time!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2198">&#34;Impossible, old fellow!&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f2199">A few moments later, the three fellow-travellers had ensconced themselves in the projectile, and screwed down the plate which covered the entrance-aperture. </span>
      <span id="f2200">The mouth of the Columbiad, now completely disencumbered, was open entirely to the sky.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2201">The moon advanced upwards in a heaven of the purest clearness, outshining in her passage the twinkling light of the stars. </span>
      <span id="f2202">She passed over the constellation of the Twins, and was now nearing the halfway point between the horizon and the zenith. </span>
      <span id="f2203">A terrible silence weighed upon the entire scene! </span>
      <span id="f2204">Not a breath of wind upon the earth! </span>
      <span id="f2205">not a sound of breathing from the countless chests of the spectators! </span>
      <span id="f2206">Their hearts seemed afraid to beat! </span>
      <span id="f2207">All eyes were fixed upon the yawning mouth of the Columbiad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2208">Murchison followed with his eye the hand of his chronometer. </span>
      <span id="f2209">It wanted scarce forty seconds to the moment of departure, but each second seemed to last an age! </span>
      <span id="f2210">At the twentieth there was a general shudder, as it occurred to the minds of that vast assemblage that the bold travellers shut up within the projectile were also counting those terrible seconds. </span>
      <span id="f2211">Some few cries here and there escaped the crowd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2212">&#34;Thirty-five!—thirty-six!—thirty-seven!—thirty-eight!—thirty-nine! </span>
      <span id="f2213">—forty! </span>
      <span id="f2214">Fire!!!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2215">Instantly Murchison pressed with his finger the key of the electric battery, restored the current of the fluid, and discharged the spark into the breach of the Columbiad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2216">An appalling unearthly report followed instantly, such as can be compared to nothing whatever known, not even to the roar of thunder, or the blast of volcanic explosions! </span>
      <span id="f2217">No words can convey the slightest idea of the terrific sound! </span>
      <span id="f2218">An immense spout of fire shot up from the bowels of the earth as from a crater. </span>
      <span id="f2219">The earth heaved up, and with great difficulty some few spectators obtained a momentary glimpse of the projectile victoriously cleaving the air in the midst of the fiery vapours!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>