<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2220">CHAPTER XXVII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2221">FOUL WEATHER.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2222">At the moment when that pyramid of fire rose to a prodigious height into the air, the glare of the flame lit up the whole of Florida; and for a moment day superseded night over a considerable extent of the country. </span>
      <span id="f2223">This immense canopy of fire was perceived at a distance of 100 miles out at sea, and more than one ship&#39;s captain entered in his log the appearance of this gigantic meteor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2224">The discharge of the Columbiad was accompanied by a perfect earthquake. </span>
      <span id="f2225">Florida was shaken to its very depths. </span>
      <span id="f2226">The gases of the powder, expanded by heat, forced back the atmospheric strata with tremendous violence, and this artificial hurricane rushed like a waterspout through the air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2227">Not a single spectator remained on his feet! </span>
      <span id="f2228">Men, women, children, all lay prostrate like ears of corn under a tempest. </span>
      <span id="f2229">There ensued a terrible tumult; a large number of persons were seriously injured. </span>
      <span id="f2230">J. </span>
      <span id="f2231">T. </span>
      <span id="f2232">Maston, who, despite of all dictates of prudence had kept in advance of the mass, was pitched back 120 feet, shooting like a projectile over the heads of his fellow-citizens. </span>
      <span id="f2233">Three hundred thousand persons remained deaf for a time, and as though struck stupefied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2234">As soon as the first effects were over, the injured, the deaf, and lastly, the crowd in general, woke up with frenzied cries. </span>
      <span id="f2235">&#34;Hurrah for Ardan! </span>
      <span id="f2236">Hurrah for Barbicane! </span>
      <span id="f2237">Hurrah for Nicholl!&#34; rose to the skies. </span>
      <span id="f2238">Thousands of persons, noses in air, armed with telescopes and race-glasses, were questioning space, forgetting all contusions and emotions in the one idea of watching for the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f2239">They looked in vain! </span>
      <span id="f2240">It was no longer to be seen, and they were obliged to wait for telegrams from Long&#39;s Peak. </span>
      <span id="f2241">The Director of the Cambridge Observatory was at his post on the Rocky Mountains; and to him, as a skilful and persevering astronomer, all observations had been confided.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2242">But an unforeseen phenomenon came in to subject the public impatience to a severe trial.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2243">The weather, hitherto so fine, suddenly changed; the sky became heavy with clouds. </span>
      <span id="f2244">It could not have been otherwise after the terrible derangement of the atmospheric strata, and the dispersion of the enormous quantity of vapour arising from the combustion of 200,000 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f2245">of pyroxyle!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2246">On the morrow the horizon was covered with clouds—a thick and impenetrable curtain between earth and sky, which unhappily extended as far as the Rocky Mountains. </span>
      <span id="f2247">It was a fatality! </span>
      <span id="f2248">But since man had chosen so to disturb the atmosphere, he was bound to accept the consequences of his experiment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2249">Supposing, now, that the experiment had succeeded, the travellers having started on the 1st of December, at 10h. </span>
      <span id="f2250">46m. </span>
      <span id="f2251">40s. </span>
      <span id="f2252">p.m., were due on the 4th at 0h. </span>
      <span id="f2253">p.m. </span>
      <span id="f2254">at their destination. </span>
      <span id="f2255">So that up to that time it would have been very difficult after all to have observed, under such conditions, a body so small as the shell. </span>
      <span id="f2256">Therefore they waited with what patience they might.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2257">From the 4th to the 6th of December inclusive, the weather remaining much the same in America, the great European instruments of Herschel, Rosse, and Foucault, were constantly directed towards the moon, for the weather was then magnificent; but the comparative weakness of their glasses prevented any trustworthy observations being made.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2258">On the 7th the sky seemed to lighten. </span>
      <span id="f2259">They were in hopes now, but their hope was of but short duration, and at night again thick clouds hid the starry vault from all eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2260">Matters were now becoming serious, when on the 9th, the sun reappeared for an instant, as if for the purpose of teasing the Americans. </span>
      <span id="f2261">It was received with hisses; and wounded, no doubt, by such a reception, showed itself very sparing of its rays.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2262">On the 10th, no change! </span>
      <span id="f2263">J. </span>
      <span id="f2264">T. </span>
      <span id="f2265">Maston went nearly mad, and great fears were entertained regarding the brain of this worthy individual, which had hitherto been so well preserved within his gutta-percha cranium.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2266">But on the 11th one of those inexplicable tempests peculiar to those intertropical regions was let loose in the atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f2267">A terrific east wind swept away the groups of clouds which had been so long gathering, and at night the semi-disc of the orb of night rode majestically amidst the soft constellations of the sky.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>