<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f2268">CHAPTER XXVIII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2269">A NEW STAR.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2270">That very night, the startling news so impatiently awaited, burst like a thunderbolt over the United States of the Union, and thence, darting across the ocean, ran through all the telegraphic wires of the globe. </span>
      <span id="f2271">The projectile had been detected, thanks to the gigantic reflector of Long&#39;s Peak! </span>
      <span id="f2272">Here is the note received by the Director of the Observatory of Cambridge. </span>
      <span id="f2273">It contains the scientific conclusion regarding this great experiment of the Gun Club.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2274">&#34;Long&#39;s Peak December 12.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2275">&#34;To the Officers of the Observatory of Cambridge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2276">&#34;The projectile discharged by the Columbiad at Stones Hill has been detected by Messrs. </span>
      <span id="f2277">Belfast and J. </span>
      <span id="f2278">T. </span>
      <span id="f2279">Maston, 12th December, at 8.47 p.m., the moon having entered her last quarter. </span>
      <span id="f2280">This projectile has not arrived at its destination. </span>
      <span id="f2281">It has passed by the side; but sufficiently near to be retained by the lunar attraction.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2282">&#34;The rectilinear movement has thus become changed into a circular motion of extreme velocity, and it is now pursuing an elliptical orbit round the moon, of which it has become a true satellite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2283">&#34;The elements of this new star we have as yet been unable to determine; we do not yet know the velocity of its passage. </span>
      <span id="f2284">The distance which separates it from the surface of the moon may be estimated at about 2833 miles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2285">&#34;However, two hypothesis come here into our consideration.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2286">&#34;1. </span>
      <span id="f2287">Either the attraction of the moon will end by drawing them into itself, and the travellers will attain their destination; or,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2288">&#34;2. </span>
      <span id="f2289">The projectile, following an immutable law, will continue to gravitate round the moon till the end of time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2290">&#34;At some future time, our observations will be able to determine this point, but till then the experiment of the Gun Club can have no other result than to have provided our solar system with a new star.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2291">&#34;J. </span>
      <span id="f2292">Belfast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2293">To how many questions did this unexpected denouement give rise? </span>
      <span id="f2294">What mysterious results was the future reserving for the investigations of science? </span>
      <span id="f2295">At all events, the names of Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan were certain to be immortalized in the annals of astronomy!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2296">When the despatch from Long&#39;s Peak had once become known, there was but one universal feeling of surprise and alarm. </span>
      <span id="f2297">Was it possible to go to the aid of these bold travellers? </span>
      <span id="f2298">No! </span>
      <span id="f2299">for they had placed themselves beyond the pale of humanity, by crossing the limits imposed by the Creator on his earthly creatures. </span>
      <span id="f2300">They had air enough for _two_ months; they had victuals enough for _twelve;—but after that?_ There was only one man who would not admit that the situation was desperate,—he alone had confidence; and that was their devoted friend J. </span>
      <span id="f2301">T. </span>
      <span id="f2302">Maston.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2303">Besides, he never let them get out of sight. </span>
      <span id="f2304">His home was henceforth the post at Long&#39;s Peak; his horizon, the mirror of that immense reflector. </span>
      <span id="f2305">As soon as the moon rose above the horizon, he immediately caught her in the field of the telescope; he never let her go for an instant out of his sight, and followed her assiduously in her course through the stellar spaces. </span>
      <span id="f2306">He watched with untiring patience the passage of the projectile across her silvery disc, and really the worthy man remained in perpetual communication with his three friends, whom he did not despair of seeing again some day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2307">&#34;Those three men,&#34; said he, &#34;have carried into space all the resources of art, science, and industry. </span>
      <span id="f2308">With that, one can do anything; and you will see that, some day, they will come out all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>