<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0428">CHAPTER III.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0429">THEIR PLACE OF SHELTER.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0430">This curious but certainly correct explanation once given, the three friends returned to their slumbers. </span>
      <span id="f0431">Could they have found a calmer or more peaceful spot to sleep in? </span>
      <span id="f0432">On the earth, houses, towns, cottages, and country feel every shock given to the exterior of the globe. </span>
      <span id="f0433">On sea, the vessels rocked by the waves are still in motion; in the air, the balloon oscillates incessantly on the fluid strata of divers densities. </span>
      <span id="f0434">This projectile alone, floating in perfect space, in the midst of perfect silence, offered perfect repose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0435">Thus the sleep of our adventurous travellers might have been indefinitely prolonged, if an unexpected noise had not awakened them at about seven o&#39;clock in the morning of the 2nd of December, eight hours after their departure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0436">This noise was a very natural barking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0437">&#34;The dogs! </span>
      <span id="f0438">it is the dogs!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, rising at once.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0439">&#34;They are hungry,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0440">&#34;By Jove!&#34; replied Michel, &#34;we have forgotten them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0441">&#34;Where are they?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0442">They looked and found one of the animals crouched under the divan. </span>
      <span id="f0443">Terrified and shaken by the initiatory shock, it had remained in the corner till its voice returned with the pangs of hunger. </span>
      <span id="f0444">It was the amiable Diana, still very confused, who crept out of her retreat, though not without much persuasion, Michel Ardan encouraging her with most gracious words.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0445">&#34;Come, Diana,&#34; said he; &#34;come, my girl! </span>
      <span id="f0446">thou whose destiny will be marked in the cynegetic annals; thou whom the pagans would have given as companion to the god Anubis, and Christians as friend to St. </span>
      <span id="f0447">Roch; thou who art rushing into interplanetary space, and wilt perhaps be the Eve of all Selenite dogs! </span>
      <span id="f0448">come, Diana, come here.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0449">Diana, flattered or not, advanced by degrees, uttering plaintive cries.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0450">&#34;Good,&#34; said Barbicane; &#34;I see Eve, but where is Adam?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0451">&#34;Adam?&#34; replied Michel; &#34;Adam cannot be far off; he is there somewhere; we must call him. </span>
      <span id="f0452">Satellite! </span>
      <span id="f0453">here, Satellite!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0454">But Satellite did not appear. </span>
      <span id="f0455">Diana would not leave off howling. </span>
      <span id="f0456">They found, however, that she was not bruised, and they gave her a pie, which silenced her complaints. </span>
      <span id="f0457">As to Satellite, he seemed quite lost. </span>
      <span id="f0458">They had to hunt a long time before finding him in one of the upper compartments of the projectile, whither some unaccountable shock must have violently hurled him. </span>
      <span id="f0459">The poor beast, much hurt, was in a piteous state.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0460">&#34;The devil!&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0461">They brought the unfortunate dog down with great care. </span>
      <span id="f0462">Its skull had been broken against the roof, and it seemed unlikely that he could recover from such a shock. </span>
      <span id="f0463">Meanwhile, he was stretched comfortably on a cushion. </span>
      <span id="f0464">Once there, he heaved a sigh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0465">&#34;We will take care of you,&#34; said Michel; &#34;we are responsible for your existence. </span>
      <span id="f0466">I would rather lose an arm than a paw of my poor Satellite.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0467">Saying which, he offered some water to the wounded dog, who swallowed it with avidity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0468">This attention paid, the travellers watched the earth and the moon attentively. </span>
      <span id="f0469">The earth was now only discernible by a cloudy disc ending in a crescent, rather more contracted than that of the previous evening; but its expanse was still enormous, compared with that of the moon, which was approaching nearer and nearer to a perfect circle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0470">&#34;By Jove!&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;I am really sorry that we did not start when the earth was full, that is to say, when our globe was in opposition to the sun.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0471">&#34;Why?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0472">&#34;Because we should have seen our continents and seas in a new light,—the first resplendent under the solar rays, the latter cloudy as represented on some maps of the world. </span>
      <span id="f0473">I should like to have seen those poles of the earth on which the eye of man has never yet rested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0474">&#34;I dare say,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;but if the earth had been _full_, the moon would have been _new_; that is to say, invisible, because of the rays of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0475">It is better for us to see the destination we wish to reach, than the point of departure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0476">&#34;You are right, Barbicane,&#34; replied Captain Nicholl; &#34;and, besides, when we have reached the moon, we shall have time during the long lunar nights to consider at our leisure the globe on which our likenesses swarm.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0477">&#34;Our likenesses!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan; &#34;they are no more our likenesses than the Selenites are! </span>
      <span id="f0478">We inhabit a new world, peopled by ourselves—the projectile! </span>
      <span id="f0479">I am Barbicane&#39;s likeness, and Barbicane is Nicholl&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f0480">Beyond us, around us, human nature is at an end, and we are the only population of this microcosm until we become pure Selenites.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0481">&#34;In about eighty-eight hours,&#34; replied the captain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0482">&#34;Which means to say?&#34; asked Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0483">&#34;That it is half-past eight,&#34; replied Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0484">&#34;Very well,&#34; retorted Michel; &#34;then it is impossible for me to find even the shadow of a reason why we should not go to breakfast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0485">Indeed the inhabitants of the new star could not live without eating, and their stomachs were suffering from the imperious laws of hunger. </span>
      <span id="f0486">Michel Ardan, as a Frenchman, was declared chief cook, an important function, which raised no rival. </span>
      <span id="f0487">The gas gave sufficient heat for the culinary apparatus, and the provision-box furnished the elements of this first feast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0488">The breakfast began with three bowls of excellent soup, thanks to the liquefaction in hot water of those precious cakes of Liebig, prepared from the best parts of the ruminants of the Pampas. </span>
      <span id="f0489">To the soup succeeded some beefsteaks, compressed by an hydraulic press, as tender and succulent as if brought straight from the kitchen of an English eating-house. </span>
      <span id="f0490">Michel, who was imaginative, maintained that they were even &#34;red.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0491">Preserved vegetables (&#34;fresher than nature,&#34; said the amiable Michel) succeeded the dish of meat; and was followed by some cups of tea with bread and butter, after the American fashion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0492">The beverage was declared exquisite, and was due to the infusion of the choicest leaves, of which the Emperor of Russia had given some chests for the benefit of the travellers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0493">And lastly, to crown the repast, Ardan brought out a fine bottle of Nuits, which was found &#34;by chance&#34; in the provision-box. </span>
      <span id="f0494">The three friends drank to the union of the earth and her satellite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0495">And, as if he had not already done enough for the generous wine which he had distilled on the slopes of Burgundy, the sun chose to be of the party. </span>
      <span id="f0496">At this moment the projectile emerged from the conical shadow cast by the terrestrial globe, and the rays of the radiant orb struck the lower disc of the projectile direct occasioned by the angle which the moon&#39;s orbit makes with that of the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0497">&#34;The sun!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0498">&#34;No doubt,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;I expected it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0499">&#34;But,&#34; said Michel, &#34;the conical shadow which the earth leaves in space extends beyond the moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0500">&#34;Far beyond it, if the atmospheric refraction is not taken into consideration,&#34; said Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0501">&#34;But when the moon is enveloped in this shadow, it is because the centres of the three stars, the sun, the earth, and the moon, are all in one and the same straight line. </span>
      <span id="f0502">Then the _nodes_ coincide with the _phases_ of the moon, and there is an eclipse. </span>
      <span id="f0503">If we had started when there was an eclipse of the moon, all our passage would have been in the shadow, which would have been a pity.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0504">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0505">&#34;Because, though we are floating in space, our projectile, bathed in the solar rays, will receive their light and heat. </span>
      <span id="f0506">It economizes the gas, which is in every respect a good economy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0507">Indeed, under these rays which no atmosphere can temper, either in temperature or brilliancy, the projectile grew warm and bright, as if it had passed suddenly from winter to summer. </span>
      <span id="f0508">The moon above, the sun beneath, were inundating it with their fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0509">&#34;It is pleasant here,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0510">&#34;I should think so,&#34; said Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0511">&#34;With a little earth spread on our aluminium planet we should have green peas in twenty-four hours. </span>
      <span id="f0512">I have but one fear, which is that the walls of the projectile might melt.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0513">&#34;Calm yourself, my worthy friend,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;the projectile withstood a very much higher temperature than this as it slid through the strata of the atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f0514">I should not be surprised if it did not look like a meteor on fire to the eyes of the spectators in Florida.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0515">&#34;But then Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f0516">Maston will think we are roasted!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0517">&#34;What astonishes me,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;is that we have not been. </span>
      <span id="f0518">That was a danger we had not provided for.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0519">&#34;I feared it,&#34; said Nicholl simply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0520">&#34;And you never mentioned it, my sublime captain,&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, clasping his friend&#39;s hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0521">Barbicane now began to settle himself in the projectile as if he was never to leave it. </span>
      <span id="f0522">One must remember that this aerial car had a base with a superficies of fifty-four square feet. </span>
      <span id="f0523">Its height to the roof was twelve feet. </span>
      <span id="f0524">Carefully laid out in the inside, and little encumbered by instruments and travelling utensils which each had their particular place, it left the three travellers a certain freedom of movement. </span>
      <span id="f0525">The thick window inserted in the bottom could bear any amount of weight, and Barbicane and his companions walked upon it as if it were solid plank; but the sun striking it directly with its rays lit the interior of the projectile from beneath, thus producing singular effects of light.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0526">They began by investigating the state of their store of water and provisions, neither of which had suffered, thanks to the care taken to deaden the shock. </span>
      <span id="f0527">Their provisions were abundant, and plentiful enough to last the three travellers for more than a year. </span>
      <span id="f0528">Barbicane wished to be cautious, in case the projectile should land on a part of the moon which was utterly barren. </span>
      <span id="f0529">As to water and the reserve of brandy, which consisted of fifty gallons, there was only enough for two months; but according to the last observations of astronomers, the moon had a low, dense, and thick atmosphere, at least in the deep valleys, and there springs and streams could not fail. </span>
      <span id="f0530">Thus, during their passage, and for the first year of their settlement on the lunar continent, these adventurous explorers would suffer neither hunger nor thirst.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0531">Now about the air in the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0532">There, too, they were secure. </span>
      <span id="f0533">Reiset and Regnaut&#39;s apparatus, intended for the production of oxygen, was supplied with chlorate of potassium for two months. </span>
      <span id="f0534">They necessarily consumed a certain quantity of gas, for they were obliged to keep the producing substance at a temperature of above 400°. </span>
      <span id="f0535">But there again they were all safe. </span>
      <span id="f0536">The apparatus only wanted a little care. </span>
      <span id="f0537">But it was not enough to renew the oxygen; they must absorb the carbonic acid produced by expiration. </span>
      <span id="f0538">During the last twelve hours the atmosphere of the projectile had become charged with this deleterious gas. </span>
      <span id="f0539">Nicholl discovered the state of the air by observing Diana panting painfully. </span>
      <span id="f0540">The carbonic acid, by a phenomenon similar to that produced in the famous Grotto del Cane, had collected at the bottom of the projectile owing to its weight. </span>
      <span id="f0541">Poor Diana, with her head low, would suffer before her masters from the presence of this gas. </span>
      <span id="f0542">But Captain Nicholl hastened to remedy this state of things, by placing on the floor several receivers containing caustic potash which he shook about for a time, and this substance, greedy of carbonic acid, soon completely absorbed it, thus purifying the air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0543">An inventory of instruments was then begun. </span>
      <span id="f0544">The thermometers and barometers had resisted, all but one minimum thermometer, the glass of which was broken. </span>
      <span id="f0545">An excellent aneroid was drawn from the wadded box which contained it and hung on the wall. </span>
      <span id="f0546">Of course it was only affected by and marked the pressure of the air inside the projectile, but it also showed the quantity of moisture which it contained. </span>
      <span id="f0547">At that moment its needle oscillated between 25.24 and 25.08.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0548">It was fine weather.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0549">Barbicane had also brought several compasses, which he found intact. </span>
      <span id="f0550">One must understand that under present conditions their needles were acting _wildly_, that is without any _constant_ direction. </span>
      <span id="f0551">Indeed, at the distance they were from the earth, the magnetic pole could have no perceptible action upon the apparatus; but the box placed on the lunar disc might perhaps exhibit some strange phenomena. </span>
      <span id="f0552">In any case it would be interesting to see whether the earth&#39;s satellite submitted like herself to its magnetic influence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0553">A hypsometer to measure the height of the lunar mountains, a sextant to take the height of the sun, glasses which would be useful as they neared the moon, all these instruments were carefully looked over, and pronounced good in spite of the violent shock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0554">As to the pickaxes and different tools which were Nicholl&#39;s especial choice; as to the sacks of different kinds of grain and shrubs which Michel Ardan hoped to transplant into Selenite ground, they were stowed away in the upper part of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0555">There was a sort of granary there, loaded with things which the extravagant Frenchman had heaped up. </span>
      <span id="f0556">What they were no one knew, and the good-tempered fellow did not explain. </span>
      <span id="f0557">Now and then he climbed up by cramp-irons riveted to the walls, but kept the inspection to himself. </span>
      <span id="f0558">He arranged and rearranged, he plunged his hand rapidly into certain mysterious boxes, singing in one of the falsest of voices an old French refrain to enliven the situation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0559">Barbicane observed with some interest that his guns and other arms had not been damaged. </span>
      <span id="f0560">These were important, because, heavily loaded, they were to help to lessen the fall of the projectile, when drawn by the lunar attraction (after having passed the point of neutral attraction) on to the moon&#39;s surface; a fall which ought to be six times less rapid than it would have been on the earth&#39;s surface, thanks to the difference of bulk. </span>
      <span id="f0561">The inspection ended with general satisfaction, when each returned to watch space through the side windows and the lower glass coverlid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0562">There was the same view. </span>
      <span id="f0563">The whole extent of the celestial sphere swarmed with stars and constellations of wonderful purity, enough to drive an astronomer out of his mind! </span>
      <span id="f0564">On one side the sun, like the mouth of a lighted oven, a dazzling disc without a halo, standing out on the dark background of the sky! </span>
      <span id="f0565">On the other, the moon returning its fire by reflection, and apparently motionless in the midst of the starry world. </span>
      <span id="f0566">Then, a large spot seemingly nailed to the firmament, bordered by a silvery cord: it was the earth! </span>
      <span id="f0567">Here and there nebulous masses like large flakes of starry snow; and from the zenith to the nadir, an immense ring formed by an impalpable dust of stars, the &#34;Milky Way,&#34; in the midst of which the sun ranks only as a star of the fourth magnitude. </span>
      <span id="f0568">The observers could not take their eyes from this novel spectacle, of which no description could give an adequate idea. </span>
      <span id="f0569">What reflections it suggested! </span>
      <span id="f0570">What emotions hitherto unknown awoke in their souls! </span>
      <span id="f0571">Barbicane wished to begin the relation of his journey while under its first impressions, and hour after hour took notes of all facts happening in the beginning of the enterprise. </span>
      <span id="f0572">He wrote quietly, with his large square writing, in a businesslike style.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0573">During this time Nicholl, the calculator, looked over the minutes of their passage, and worked out figures with unparalleled dexterity. </span>
      <span id="f0574">Michel Ardan chatted first with Barbicane, who did not answer him, and then with Nicholl, who did not hear him, with Diana, who understood none of his theories, and lastly with himself, questioning and answering, going and coming, busy with a thousand details; at one time bent over the lower glass, at another roosting in the heights of the projectile, and always singing. </span>
      <span id="f0575">In this microcosm he represented French loquacity and excitability, and we beg you to believe that they were well represented. </span>
      <span id="f0576">The day, or rather (for the expression is not correct) the lapse of twelve hours, which forms a day upon earth, closed with a plentiful supper carefully prepared. </span>
      <span id="f0577">No accident of any nature had yet happened to shake the travellers&#39; confidence; so, full of hope, already sure of success, they slept peacefully, whilst the projectile under an uniformly decreasing speed was crossing the sky.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>