<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0578">CHAPTER IV.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0579">A LITTLE ALGEBRA.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0580">The night passed without incident. </span>
      <span id="f0581">The word &#34;night,&#34; however, is scarcely applicable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0582">The position of the projectile with regard to the sun did not change. </span>
      <span id="f0583">Astronomically, it was daylight on the lower part, and night on the upper; so when during this narrative these words are used, they represent the lapse of time between the rising and setting of the sun upon the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0584">The travellers&#39; sleep was rendered more peaceful by the projectile&#39;s excessive speed, for it seemed absolutely motionless. </span>
      <span id="f0585">Not a motion betrayed its onward course through space. </span>
      <span id="f0586">The rate of progress, however rapid it might be, cannot produce any sensible effect on the human frame when it takes place in a vacuum, or when the mass of air circulates with the body which is carried with it. </span>
      <span id="f0587">What inhabitant of the earth perceives its speed, which, however, is at the rate of 68,000 miles per hour? </span>
      <span id="f0588">Motion under such conditions is &#34;felt&#34; no more than repose; and when a body is in repose it will remain so as long as no strange force displaces it; if moving, it will not stop unless an obstacle comes in its way. </span>
      <span id="f0589">This indifference to motion or repose is called inertia.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0590">Barbicane and his companions might have believed themselves perfectly stationary, being shut up in the projectile; indeed, the effect would have been the same if they had been on the outside of it. </span>
      <span id="f0591">Had it not been for the moon, which was increasing above them, they might have sworn that they were floating in complete stagnation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0592">That morning, the 3rd of December, the travellers were awakened by a joyous but unexpected noise; it was the crowing of a cock which sounded through the car. </span>
      <span id="f0593">Michel Ardan, who was the first on his feet, climbed to the top of the projectile, and shutting a box, the lid of which was partly open, said in a low voice, &#34;Will you hold your tongue? </span>
      <span id="f0594">That creature will spoil my design!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0595">But Nicholl and Barbicane were awake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0596">&#34;A cock!&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0597">&#34;Why no, my friends,&#34; Michel answered quickly; &#34;it was I who wished to awake you by this rural sound.&#34; So saying, he gave vent to a splendid cock-a-doodledoo, which would have done honour to the proudest of poultry-yards.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0598">The two Americans could not help laughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0599">&#34;Fine talent that,&#34; said Nicholl, looking suspiciously at his companion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0600">&#34;Yes,&#34; said Michel; &#34;a joke in my country. </span>
      <span id="f0601">It is very Gallic; they play the cock so in the best society.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0602">Then turning the conversation,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0603">&#34;Barbicane, do you know what I have been thinking of all night?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0604">&#34;No,&#34; answered the president.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0605">&#34;Of our Cambridge friends. </span>
      <span id="f0606">You have already remarked that I am an ignoramus in mathematical subjects; and it is impossible for me to find out how the savants of the Observatory were able to calculate what initiatory speed the projectile ought to have on leaving the Columbiad in order to attain the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0607">&#34;You mean to say,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;to attain that neutral point where the terrestrial and lunar attractions are equal; for, starting from that point, situated about nine-tenths of the distance travelled over, the projectile would simply fall upon the moon, on account of its weight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0608">&#34;So be it,&#34; said Michel; &#34;but, once more; how could they calculate the initiatory speed?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0609">&#34;Nothing can be easier,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0610">&#34;And you knew how to make that calculation?&#34; asked Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0611">&#34;Perfectly. </span>
      <span id="f0612">Nicholl and I would have made it, if the Observatory had not saved us the trouble.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0613">&#34;Very well, old Barbicane,&#34; replied Michel; &#34;they might have cut off my head, beginning at my feet, before they could have made me solve that problem.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0614">&#34;Because you do not know algebra,&#34; answered Barbicane quietly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0615">&#34;Ah, there you are, you eaters of _x_¹; you think you have said all when you have said &#39;Algebra.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0616">&#34;Michel,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;can you use a forge without a hammer, or plough without a ploughshare?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0617">&#34;Hardly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0618">&#34;Well, algebra is a tool, like the plough or the hammer, and a good tool to those who know how to use it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0619">&#34;Seriously?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0620">&#34;Quite seriously.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0621">&#34;And can you use that tool in my presence?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0622">&#34;If it will interest you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0623">&#34;And show me how they calculated the initiatory speed of our car?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0624">&#34;Yes, my worthy friend; taking into consideration all the elements of the problem, the distance from the centre of the earth to the centre of the moon, of the radius of the earth, of its bulk, and of the bulk of the moon, I can tell exactly what ought to be the initiatory speed of the projectile, and that by a simple formula.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0625">&#34;Let us see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0626">&#34;You shall see it; only I shall not give you the real course drawn by the projectile between the moon and the earth in considering their motion round the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0627">No, I shall consider these two orbs as perfectly motionless, which will answer all our purpose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0628">&#34;And why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0629">&#34;Because it will be trying to solve the problem called &#39;the problem of the three bodies,&#39; for which the integral calculus is not yet far enough advanced.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0630">&#34;Then,&#34; said Michel Ardan, in his sly tone, &#34;mathematics have not said their last word?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0631">&#34;Certainly not,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0632">&#34;Well, perhaps the Selenites have carried the integral calculus farther than you have; and, by the bye, what is &#39;integral calculus?&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0633">&#34;It is a calculation the converse of the differential,&#34; replied Barbicane seriously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0634">&#34;Much obliged; it is all very clear, no doubt.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0635">&#34;And now,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;a slip of paper and a bit of pencil, and before a half-hour is over I will have found the required formula.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0636">Half an hour had not elapsed before Barbicane, raising his head, showed Michel Ardan a page covered with algebraical signs, in which the general formula for the solution was contained.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0637">&#34;Well, and does Nicholl understand what that means?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0638">&#34;Of course, Michel,&#34; replied the captain. </span>
      <span id="f0639">&#34;All these signs, which seem cabalistic to you, form the plainest, the clearest, and the most logical language to those who know how to read it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0640">&#34;And you pretend, Nicholl,&#34; asked Michel, &#34;that by means of these hieroglyphics, more incomprehensible than the Egyptian Ibis, you can find what initiatory speed it was necessary to give to the projectile?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0641">&#34;Incontestably,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;and even by this same formula I can always tell you its speed at any point of its transit.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0642">&#34;On your word?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0643">&#34;On my word.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0644">&#34;Then you are as cunning as our president.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0645">&#34;No, Michel; the difficult part is what Barbicane has done; that is, to get an equation which shall satisfy all the conditions of the problem. </span>
      <span id="f0646">The remainder is only a question of arithmetic, requiring merely the knowledge of the four rules.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0647">&#34;That is something!&#34; replied Michel Ardan, who for his life could not do addition right, and who defined the rule as a Chinese puzzle, which allowed one to obtain all sorts of totals.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0648">&#34;The expression _v_ zero, which you see in that equation, is the speed which the projectile will have on leaving the atmosphere.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0649">&#34;Just so,&#34; said Nicholl; &#34;it is from that point that we must calculate the velocity, since we know already that the velocity at departure was exactly one and a half times more than on leaving the atmosphere.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0650">&#34;I understand no more,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0651">&#34;It is a very simple calculation,&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0652">&#34;Not as simple as I am,&#34; retorted Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0653">&#34;That means, that when our projectile reached the limits of the terrestrial atmosphere it had already lost one-third of its initiatory speed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0654">&#34;As much as that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0655">&#34;Yes, my friend; merely by friction against the atmospheric strata. </span>
      <span id="f0656">You understand that the faster it goes the more resistance it meets with from the air.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0657">&#34;That I admit,&#34; answered Michel; &#34;and I understand it, although your x&#39;s and zero&#39;s, and algebraic formulæ, are rattling in my head like nails in a bag.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0658">&#34;First effects of algebra,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;and now, to finish, we are going to prove the given number of these different expressions, that is, work out their value.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0659">&#34;Finish me!&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0660">Barbicane took the paper, and began again to make his calculations with great rapidity. </span>
      <span id="f0661">Nicholl looked over and greedily read the work as it proceeded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0662">&#34;That&#39;s it! </span>
      <span id="f0663">that&#39;s it!&#34; at last he cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0664">&#34;Is it clear?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0665">&#34;It is written in letters of fire,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0666">&#34;Wonderful fellows!&#34; muttered Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0667">&#34;Do you understand it at last?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0668">&#34;Do I understand it?&#34; cried Ardan; &#34;my head is splitting with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0669">&#34;And now,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;to find out the speed of the projectile when it left the atmosphere, we have only to calculate that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0670">The captain, as a practical man equal to all difficulties, began to write with frightful rapidity. </span>
      <span id="f0671">Divisions and multiplications grew under his fingers; the figures were like hail on the white page. </span>
      <span id="f0672">Barbicane watched him, whilst Michel Ardan nursed a growing headache with both hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0673">&#34;Very well?&#34; asked Barbicane, after some minutes&#39; silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0674">&#34;Well!&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;every calculation made, _v_ zero, that is to say, the speed necessary for the projectile on leaving the atmosphere, to enable it to reach the equal point of attraction, ought to be—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0675">&#34;Yes?&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0676">&#34;Twelve thousand yards.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0677">&#34;What!&#34; exclaimed Barbicane, starting; &#34;you say—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0678">&#34;Twelve thousand yards.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0679">&#34;The devil!&#34; cried the president, making a gesture of despair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0680">&#34;What is the matter?&#34; asked Michel Ardan, much surprised.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0681">&#34;What is the matter! </span>
      <span id="f0682">why, if at this moment our speed had already diminished one-third by friction, the initiatory speed ought to have been—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0683">&#34;Seventeen thousand yards.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0684">&#34;And the Cambridge Observatory declared that 12,000 yards was enough at starting; and our projectile, which only started with that speed—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0685">&#34;Well?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0686">&#34;Well, it will not be enough.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0687">&#34;Good.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0688">&#34;We shall not be able to reach the neutral point.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0689">&#34;The deuce!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0690">&#34;We shall not even get half way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0691">&#34;In the name of the projectile!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, jumping as if it was already on the point of striking the terrestrial globe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0692">&#34;And we shall fall back upon the earth!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>