<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0693">CHAPTER V.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0694">THE COLD OF SPACE.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0695">This revelation came like a thunderbolt. </span>
      <span id="f0696">Who could have expected such an error in calculation? </span>
      <span id="f0697">Barbicane would not believe it. </span>
      <span id="f0698">Nicholl revised his figures: they were exact. </span>
      <span id="f0699">As to the formula which had determined them, they could not suspect its truth; it was evident that an initiatory velocity of 17,000 yards in the first second was necessary to enable them to reach the neutral point.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0700">The three friends looked at each other silently. </span>
      <span id="f0701">There was no thought of breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f0702">Barbicane, with clenched teeth, knitted brows, and hands clasped convulsively, was watching through the window. </span>
      <span id="f0703">Nicholl had crossed his arms, and was examining his calculations. </span>
      <span id="f0704">Michel Ardan was muttering,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0705">&#34;That is just like those scientific men: they never do anything else. </span>
      <span id="f0706">I would give twenty pistoles if we could fall upon the Cambridge Observatory and crush it, together with the whole lot of dabblers in figures which it contains.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0707">Suddenly a thought struck the captain, which he at once communicated to Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0708">&#34;Ah!&#34; said he; &#34;it is seven o&#39;clock in the morning; we have already been gone thirty-two hours; more than half our passage is over, and we are not falling that I am aware of.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0709">Barbicane did not answer, but after a rapid glance at the captain, took a pair of compasses wherewith to measure the angular distance of the terrestrial globe; then from the lower window he took an exact observation, and noticed that the projectile was apparently stationary. </span>
      <span id="f0710">Then rising and wiping his forehead, on which large drops of perspiration were standing, he put some figures on paper. </span>
      <span id="f0711">Nicholl understood that the president was deducting from the terrestrial diameter the projectile&#39;s distance from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0712">He watched him anxiously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0713">&#34;No,&#34; exclaimed Barbicane, after some moments, &#34;no, we are not falling! </span>
      <span id="f0714">no, we are already more than 50,000 leagues from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0715">We have passed the point at which the projectile would have stopped if its speed had only been 12,000 yards at starting. </span>
      <span id="f0716">We are still going up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0717">&#34;That is evident,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;and we must conclude that our initial speed, under the power of the 400,000 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f0718">of gun-cotton, must have exceeded the required 12,000 yards. </span>
      <span id="f0719">Now I can understand how, after thirteen minutes only, we met the second satellite, which gravitates round the earth at more than 2000 leagues&#39; distance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0720">&#34;And this explanation is the more probable,&#34; added Barbicane, &#34;because, in throwing off the water enclosed between its partition-breaks, the projectile found itself lightened of a considerable weight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0721">&#34;Just so,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0722">&#34;Ah, my brave Nicholl, we are saved!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0723">&#34;Very well then,&#34; said Michel Ardan quietly; &#34;as we are safe, let us have breakfast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0724">Nicholl was not mistaken. </span>
      <span id="f0725">The initial speed had been, very fortunately, much above that estimated by the Cambridge Observatory; but the Cambridge Observatory had nevertheless made a mistake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0726">The travellers, recovered from this false alarm, breakfasted merrily. </span>
      <span id="f0727">If they ate a great deal, they talked more. </span>
      <span id="f0728">Their confidence was greater after than before &#34;the incident of the algebra.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0729">&#34;Why should we not succeed?&#34; said Michel Ardan; &#34;why should we not arrive safely? </span>
      <span id="f0730">We are launched; we have no obstacle before us, no stones in our way; the road is open, more so than that of a ship battling with the sea; more open than that of a balloon battling with the wind; and if a ship can reach its destination, a balloon go where it pleases, why cannot our projectile attain its end and aim?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0731">&#34;It _will_ attain it,&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0732">&#34;If only to do honour to the Americans,&#34; added Michel Ardan, &#34;the only people who could bring such an enterprise to a happy termination, and the only one which could produce a President Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0733">Ah, now we are no longer uneasy, I begin to think, What will become of us? </span>
      <span id="f0734">We shall get right royally weary.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0735">Barbicane and Nicholl made a gesture of denial.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0736">&#34;But I have provided for the contingency, my friends,&#34; replied Michel; &#34;you have only to speak, and I have chess, draughts, cards, and dominoes at your disposal; nothing is wanting but a billiard-table.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0737">&#34;What!&#34; exclaimed Barbicane; &#34;you brought away such trifles?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0738">&#34;Certainly,&#34; replied Michel, &#34;and not only to distract ourselves, but also with the laudable intention of endowing the Selenite smoking divans with them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0739">&#34;My friend,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;if the moon is inhabited, its inhabitants must have appeared some thousands of years before those of the earth, for we cannot doubt that their star is much older than ours. </span>
      <span id="f0740">If then these Selenites have existed their hundreds of thousands of years, and if their brain is of the same organization as the human brain, they have already invented all that we have invented, and even what we may invent in future ages. </span>
      <span id="f0741">They have nothing to learn from _us_, and we have everything to learn from _them_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0742">&#34;What!&#34; said Michel; &#34;you believe that they have artists like Phidias, Michael Angelo, or Raphael?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0743">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0744">&#34;Poets like Homer, Virgil, Milton, Lamartine, and Hugo?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0745">&#34;I am sure of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0746">&#34;Philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Kant?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0747">&#34;I have no doubt of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0748">&#34;Scientific men like Archimedes, Euclid, Pascal, Newton?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0749">&#34;I could swear it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0750">&#34;Comic writers like Arnal, and photographers like—like Nadar?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0751">&#34;Certain.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0752">&#34;Then, friend Barbicane, if they are as strong as we are, and even stronger—these Selenites—why have they not tried to communicate with the earth? </span>
      <span id="f0753">why have they not launched a lunar projectile to our terrestrial regions?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0754">&#34;Who told you that they have never done so?&#34; said Barbicane seriously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0755">&#34;Indeed,&#34; added Nicholl, &#34;it would be easier for them than for us, for two reasons; first, because the attraction on the moon&#39;s surface is six times less than on that of the earth, which would allow a projectile to rise more easily; secondly, because it would be enough to send such a projectile only at 8000 leagues instead of 80,000, which would require the force of projection to be ten times less strong.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0756">&#34;Then,&#34; continued Michel, &#34;I repeat it, why have they not done it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0757">&#34;And I repeat,&#34; said Barbicane; &#34;who told you that they have not done it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0758">&#34;When?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0759">&#34;Thousands of years before man appeared on earth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0760">&#34;And the projectile—where is the projectile? </span>
      <span id="f0761">I demand to see the projectile.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0762">&#34;My friend,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;the sea covers five-sixths of our globe. </span>
      <span id="f0763">From that we may draw five good reasons for supposing that the lunar projectile, if ever launched, is now at the bottom of the Atlantic or the Pacific, unless it sped into some crevasse at that period when the crust of the earth was not yet hardened.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0764">&#34;Old Barbicane,&#34; said Michel, &#34;you have an answer for everything, and I bow before your wisdom. </span>
      <span id="f0765">But there is one hypothesis that would suit me better than all the others, which is, that the Selenites, being older than we, are wiser, and have not invented _gunpowder_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0766">At this moment Diana joined in the conversation by a sonorous barking. </span>
      <span id="f0767">She was asking for her breakfast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0768">&#34;Ah!&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;in our discussion we have forgotten Diana and Satellite.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0769">Immediately a good-sized pie was given to the dog, which devoured it hungrily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0770">&#34;Do you see, Barbicane,&#34; said Michel, &#34;we should have made a second Noah&#39;s Ark of this projectile, and borne with us to the moon a couple of every kind of domestic animal.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0771">&#34;I dare say; but room would have failed us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0772">&#34;Oh!&#34; said Michel, &#34;we might have squeezed a little.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0773">&#34;The fact is,&#34; replied Nicholl, &#34;that cows, bulls, and horses, and all ruminants, would have been very useful on the lunar continent, but unfortunately the car could neither have been made a stable nor a shed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0774">&#34;Well, we might at least have brought a donkey, only a little donkey; that courageous beast which old Silenus loved to mount. </span>
      <span id="f0775">I love those old donkeys; they are the least favoured animals in creation; they are not only beaten while alive, but even after they are dead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0776">&#34;How do you make that out?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0777">&#34;Why,&#34; said Michel, &#34;they make their skins into drums.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0778">Barbicane and Nicholl could not help laughing at this ridiculous remark. </span>
      <span id="f0779">But a cry from their merry companion stopped them. </span>
      <span id="f0780">The latter was leaning over the spot where Satellite lay. </span>
      <span id="f0781">He rose, saying,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0782">&#34;My good Satellite is no longer ill.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0783">&#34;Ah!&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0784">&#34;No,&#34; answered Michel, &#34;he is dead! </span>
      <span id="f0785">There,&#34; added he, in a piteous tone, &#34;that is embarrassing. </span>
      <span id="f0786">I much fear, my poor Diana, that you will leave no progeny in the lunar regions!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0787">Indeed the unfortunate Satellite had not survived its wound.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0788">It was quite dead. </span>
      <span id="f0789">Michel Ardan looked at his friends with a rueful countenance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0790">&#34;One question presents itself,&#34; said Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0791">&#34;We cannot keep the dead body of this dog with us for the next forty-eight hours.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0792">&#34;No! </span>
      <span id="f0793">certainly not,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;but our scuttles are fixed on hinges; they can be let down. </span>
      <span id="f0794">We will open one, and throw the body out into space.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0795">The president thought for some moments, and then said,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">&#34;Yes, we must do so, but at the same time taking very great precautions.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0797">&#34;Why?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0798">&#34;For two reasons which you will understand,&#34; answered Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0799">&#34;The first relates to the air shut up in the projectile, and of which we must lose as little as possible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0800">&#34;But we manufacture the air?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0801">&#34;Only in part. </span>
      <span id="f0802">We make only the oxygen, my worthy Michel; and with regard to that, we must watch that the apparatus does not furnish the oxygen in too great a quantity; for an excess would bring us very serious physiological troubles. </span>
      <span id="f0803">But if we make the oxygen, we do not make the azote, that medium which the lungs do not absorb, and which ought to remain intact; and that azote will escape rapidly through the open scuttles.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0804">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0805">the time for throwing out poor Satellite?&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0806">&#34;Agreed; but we must act quickly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0807">&#34;And the second reason?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0808">&#34;The second reason is that we must not let the outer cold, which is excessive, penetrate the projectile or we shall be frozen to death.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0809">&#34;But the sun?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0810">&#34;The sun warms our projectile, which absorbs its rays; but it does not warm the vacuum in which we are floating at this moment. </span>
      <span id="f0811">Where there is no air, there is no more heat than diffused light; and the same with darkness: it is cold where the sun&#39;s rays do not strike direct. </span>
      <span id="f0812">This temperature is only the temperature produced by the radiation of the stars; that is to say, what the terrestrial globe would undergo if the sun disappeared one day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0813">&#34;Which is not to be feared,&#34; replied Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0814">&#34;Who knows?&#34; said Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0815">&#34;But, in admitting that the sun does not go out, might it not happen that the earth might move away from it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0816">&#34;There!&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;there is Michel with his ideas.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0817">&#34;And,&#34; continued Michel, &#34;do we not know that in 1861 the earth passed through the tail of a comet? </span>
      <span id="f0818">Or let us suppose a comet whose power of attraction is greater than that of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0819">The terrestrial orbit will bend towards the wandering star, and the earth, becoming its satellite, will be drawn such a distance that the rays of the sun will have no action on its surface.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0820">&#34;That _might_ happen, indeed,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;but the consequences of such a displacement need not be so formidable as you suppose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0821">&#34;And why not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0822">&#34;Because the heat and the cold would be equalized on our globe. </span>
      <span id="f0823">It has been calculated that, had our earth been carried along in its course by the comet of 1861, at its perihelion, that is, its nearest approach to the sun, it would have undergone a heat 28,000 times greater than that of summer. </span>
      <span id="f0824">But this heat, which is sufficient to evaporate the waters, would have formed a thick ring of cloud, which would have modified that excessive temperature; hence the compensation between the cold of the aphelion and the heat of the perihelion.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0825">&#34;At how many degrees,&#34; asked Nicholl, &#34;is the temperature of the planetary spaces estimated?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0826">&#34;Formerly,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;it was greatly exaggerated; but now, after the calculations of Fourier, of the French Academy of Science, it is not supposed to exceed 60° Centigrade below zero.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0827">&#34;Pooh!&#34; said Michel, &#34;that&#39;s nothing!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0828">&#34;It is very much,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;the temperature which was observed in the polar regions, at Melville Island and Fort Reliance, that is 76° Fahrenheit below zero.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0829">&#34;If I mistake not,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;M. </span>
      <span id="f0830">Pouillet, another savant, estimates the temperature of space at 250° Fahrenheit below zero. </span>
      <span id="f0831">We shall, however, be able to verify these calculations for ourselves.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0832">&#34;Not at present; because the solar rays, beating directly upon our thermometer, would give, on the contrary, a very high temperature. </span>
      <span id="f0833">But, when we arrive in the moon, during its fifteen days of night at either face, we shall have leisure to make the experiment, for our satellite lies in a vacuum.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0834">&#34;What do you mean by a _vacuum?_&#34; asked Michel. </span>
      <span id="f0835">&#34;Is it perfectly such?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0836">&#34;It is absolutely void of air.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0837">&#34;And is the air replaced by nothing whatever?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0838">&#34;By the ether only,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0839">&#34;And pray what is the ether?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0840">&#34;The ether, my friend, is an agglomeration of imponderable atoms, which, relatively to their dimensions, are as far removed from each other as the celestial bodies are in space. </span>
      <span id="f0841">It is these atoms which, by their vibratory motion, produce both light and heat in the universe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0842">They now proceeded to the burial of Satellite. </span>
      <span id="f0843">They had merely to drop him into space, in the same way that sailors drop a body into the sea; but, as President Barbicane suggested, they must act quickly, so as to lose as little as possible of that air whose elasticity would rapidly have spread it into space. </span>
      <span id="f0844">The bolts of the right scuttle, the opening of which measured about twelve inches across, were carefully drawn, whilst Michel, quite grieved, prepared to launch his dog into space. </span>
      <span id="f0845">The glass, raised by a powerful lever, which enabled it to overcome the pressure of the inside air on the walls of the projectile, turned rapidly on its hinges, and Satellite was thrown out. </span>
      <span id="f0846">Scarcely a particle of air could have escaped, and the operation was so successful, that later on Barbicane did not fear to dispose of the rubbish which encumbered the car.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>