<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0847">CHAPTER VI.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0848">QUESTION AND ANSWER.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0849">On the 4th of December, when the travellers awoke after fifty-four hours&#39; journey, the chronometer marked five o&#39;clock of the terrestrial morning. </span>
      <span id="f0850">In time it was just over five hours and forty minutes, half of that assigned to their sojourn in the projectile; but they had already accomplished nearly seven-tenths of the way. </span>
      <span id="f0851">This peculiarity was due to their regularly decreasing speed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0852">Now when they observed the earth through the lower window, it looked like nothing more than a dark spot, drowned in the solar rays. </span>
      <span id="f0853">No more crescent, no more cloudy light! </span>
      <span id="f0854">The next day, at midnight, the earth would be _new_, at the very moment when the moon would be full. </span>
      <span id="f0855">Above, the orb of night was nearing the line followed by the projectile, so as to meet it at the given hour. </span>
      <span id="f0856">All around the black vault was studded with brilliant points, which seemed to move slowly; but, at the great distance they were from them, their relative size did not seem to change. </span>
      <span id="f0857">The sun and stars appeared exactly as they do to us upon earth. </span>
      <span id="f0858">As to the moon, she was considerably larger; but the travellers&#39; glasses, not very powerful, did not allow them as yet to make any useful observations upon her surface, or reconnoitre her topographically or geologically.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0859">Thus the time passed in never-ending conversations all about the moon. </span>
      <span id="f0860">Each one brought forward his own contingent of particular facts; Barbicane and Nicholl always serious, Michel Ardan always enthusiastic. </span>
      <span id="f0861">The projectile, its situation, its direction, incidents which might happen, the precautions necessitated by their fall on to the moon, were inexhaustible matters of conjecture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0862">As they were breakfasting, a question of Michel&#39;s, relating to the projectile, provoked rather a curious answer from Barbicane, which is worth repeating. </span>
      <span id="f0863">Michel, supposing it to be roughly stopped, while still under its formidable initial speed, wished to know what the consequences of the stoppage would have been.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0864">&#34;But,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;I do not see how it could have been stopped.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0865">&#34;But let us suppose so,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0866">&#34;It is an impossible supposition,&#34; said the practical Barbicane; &#34;unless the impulsive force had failed; but even then its speed would diminish by degrees, and it would not have stopped suddenly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0867">&#34;Admit that it had struck a body in space.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0868">&#34;What body?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0869">&#34;Why that enormous meteor which we met.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0870">&#34;Then,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;the projectile would have been broken into a thousand pieces, and we with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0871">&#34;More than that,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;we should have been burnt to death.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0872">&#34;Burnt?&#34; exclaimed Michel, &#34;by Jove! </span>
      <span id="f0873">I am sorry it did not happen, &#39;just to see.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0874">&#34;And you would have seen,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f0875">&#34;It is known now that heat is only a modification of motion. </span>
      <span id="f0876">When water is warmed—that is to say, when heat is added to it—its particles are set in motion.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0877">&#34;Well,&#34; said Michel, &#34;that is an ingenious theory!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0878">&#34;And a true one, my worthy friend; for it explains every phenomenon of caloric. </span>
      <span id="f0879">Heat is but the motion of atoms, a simple oscillation of the particles of a body. </span>
      <span id="f0880">When they apply the brake to a train, the train comes to a stop; but what becomes of the motion which it had previously possessed? </span>
      <span id="f0881">It is transformed into heat, and the brake becomes hot. </span>
      <span id="f0882">Why do they grease the axles of the wheels? </span>
      <span id="f0883">To prevent their heating, because this heat would be generated by the motion which is thus lost by transformation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0884">&#34;Yes, I understand,&#34; replied Michel, &#34;perfectly. </span>
      <span id="f0885">For example, when I have run a long time, when I am swimming, when I am perspiring in large drops, why am I obliged to stop? </span>
      <span id="f0886">Simply because my motion is changed into heat.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0887">Barbicane could not help smiling at Michel&#39;s reply; then, returning to his theory, said,—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0888">&#34;Thus, in case of a shock, it would have been with our projectile as with a ball which falls in a burning state after having struck the metal plate; it is its motion which is turned into heat. </span>
      <span id="f0889">Consequently I affirm that, if our projectile had struck the meteor, its speed thus suddenly checked would have raised a heat great enough to turn it into vapour instantaneously.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0890">&#34;Then,&#34; asked Nicholl, &#34;what would happen if the earth&#39;s motion were to stop suddenly?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0891">&#34;Her temperature would be raised to such a pitch,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;that she would be at once reduced to vapour.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0892">&#34;Well,&#34; said Michel, &#34;that is a way of ending the earth which will greatly simplify things.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0893">&#34;And if the earth fell upon the sun?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0894">&#34;According to calculation,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;the fall would develope a heat equal to that produced by 16,000 globes of coal, each equal in bulk to our terrestrial globe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0895">&#34;Good additional heat for the sun,&#34; replied Michel Ardan, &#34;of which the inhabitants of Uranus or Neptune would doubtless not complain; they must be perished with cold on their planets.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0896">&#34;Thus, my friends,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;all motion suddenly stopped produces heat. </span>
      <span id="f0897">And this theory allows us to infer that the heat of the solar disc is fed by a hail of meteors falling incessantly on its surface. </span>
      <span id="f0898">They have even calculated—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0899">&#34;Oh, dear!&#34; murmured Michel, &#34;the figures are coming.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0900">&#34;They have even calculated,&#34; continued the imperturbable Barbicane, &#34;that the shock of each meteor on the sun ought to produce a heat equal to that of 4000 masses of coal of an equal bulk.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0901">&#34;And what is the solar heat?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0902">&#34;It is equal to that produced by the combustion of a stratum of coal surrounding the sun to a depth of forty-seven miles.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0903">&#34;And that heat—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0904">&#34;Would be able to boil two billions nine hundred millions of cubic myriameters* of water.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0905">*The myriameter is equal to rather more than 10,936 cubic yards    English.—(Ed.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0906">&#34;And it does not roast us!&#34; exclaimed Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0907">&#34;No,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;because the terrestrial atmosphere absorbs four-tenths of the solar heat; besides, the quantity of heat intercepted by the earth is but a billionth part of the entire radiation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0908">&#34;I see that all is for the best,&#34; said Michel, &#34;and that this atmosphere is a useful invention; for it not only allows us to breathe, but it prevents us from roasting.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0909">&#34;Yes!&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;unfortunately, it will not be the same in the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0910">&#34;Bah!&#34; said Michel, always hopeful. </span>
      <span id="f0911">&#34;If there are inhabitants, they must breathe. </span>
      <span id="f0912">If there are no longer any, they must have left enough oxygen for three people, if only at the bottom of ravines, where its own weight will cause it to accumulate, and we will not climb the mountains; that is all.&#34; And Michel, rising, went to look at the lunar disc, which shone with intolerable brilliancy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0913">&#34;By Jove!&#34; said he, &#34;it must be hot up there!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0914">&#34;Without considering,&#34; replied Nicholl, &#34;that the day lasts 360 hours!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0915">&#34;And to compensate that,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;the nights have the same length; and as heat is restored by radiation, their temperature can only be that of the planetary space.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0916">&#34;A pretty country, that!&#34; exclaimed Michel. </span>
      <span id="f0917">&#34;Never mind! </span>
      <span id="f0918">I wish I was there! </span>
      <span id="f0919">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0920">my dear comrades, it will be rather curious to have the earth for our moon, to see it rise on the horizon, to recognize the shape of its continents, and to say to oneself, &#39;There is America, there is Europe;&#39; then to follow it when it is about to lose itself in the sun&#39;s rays! </span>
      <span id="f0921">By-the-bye, Barbicane, have the Selenites eclipses?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0922">&#34;Yes, eclipses of the sun,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;when the centres of the three orbs are on a line, the earth being in the middle. </span>
      <span id="f0923">But they are only partial, during which the earth, cast like a screen upon the solar disc, allows the greater portion to be seen.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0924">&#34;And why,&#34; asked Nicholl, &#34;is there no total eclipse? </span>
      <span id="f0925">Does not the cone of the shadow cast by the earth extend beyond the moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0926">&#34;Yes, if we do not take into consideration the refraction produced by the terrestrial atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f0927">No, if we take that refraction into consideration. </span>
      <span id="f0928">Thus δ be the horizontal parallel, and _p_ the apparent semidiameter—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0929">&#34;Oh!&#34; said Michel. </span>
      <span id="f0930">&#34;Do speak plainly, you man of algebra!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0931">&#34;Very well;&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;in popular language the mean distance from the moon to the earth being sixty terrestrial radii, the length of the cone of the shadow, on account of the refraction, is reduced to less than forty-two radii. </span>
      <span id="f0932">The result is that when there are eclipses, the moon finds itself beyond the cone of pure shadow, and that the sun sends her its rays, not only from its edges, but also from its centre.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0933">&#34;Then,&#34; said Michel, in a merry tone, &#34;why are there eclipses, when there ought not to be any?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0934">&#34;Simply because the solar rays are weakened by this refraction, and the atmosphere through which they pass extinguishes the greater part of them!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0935">&#34;That reason satisfies me,&#34; replied Michel. </span>
      <span id="f0936">&#34;Besides we shall see when we get there. </span>
      <span id="f0937">Now, tell me, Barbicane, do you believe that the moon is an old comet?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0938">&#34;There&#39;s an idea!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0939">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Michel, with an amiable swagger, &#34;I have a few ideas of that sort.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0940">&#34;But that idea does not spring from Michel,&#34; answered Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0941">&#34;Well, then, I am a plagiarist.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0942">&#34;No doubt about it. </span>
      <span id="f0943">According to the ancients, the Arcadians pretend that their ancestors inhabited the earth before the moon became her satellite. </span>
      <span id="f0944">Starting from this fact, some scientific men have seen in the moon a comet whose orbit will one day bring it so near to the earth that it will be held there by its attraction.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0945">&#34;Is there any truth in this hypothesis?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0946">&#34;None whatever,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;and the proof is, that the moon has preserved no trace of the gaseous envelope which always accompanies comets.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0947">&#34;But,&#34; continued Nicholl, &#34;before becoming the earth&#39;s satellite, could not the moon, when in her perihelion, pass so near the sun as by evaporation to get rid of all those gaseous substances?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0948">&#34;It is possible, friend Nicholl, but not probable.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0949">&#34;Why not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0950">&#34;Because—Faith I do not know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0951">&#34;Ah!&#34; exclaimed Michel, &#34;what hundreds of volumes we might make of all that we do not know!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0952">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0953">indeed. </span>
      <span id="f0954">What time is it?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0955">&#34;Three o&#39;clock,&#34; answered Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0956">&#34;How time goes,&#34; said Michel, &#34;in the conversation of scientific men such as we are! </span>
      <span id="f0957">Certainly, I feel I know too much! </span>
      <span id="f0958">I feel that I am becoming a well!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0959">Saying which, Michel hoisted himself to the roof of the projectile, &#34;to observe the moon better,&#34; he pretended. </span>
      <span id="f0960">During this time his companions were watching through the lower glass. </span>
      <span id="f0961">Nothing new to note!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0962">When Michel Ardan came down, he went to the side scuttle; and suddenly they heard an exclamation of surprise!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0963">&#34;What is it?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0964">The president approached the window, and saw a sort of flattened sack floating some yards from the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f0965">This object seemed as motionless as the projectile, and was consequently animated with the same ascending movement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0966">&#34;What is that machine?&#34; continued Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f0967">&#34;Is it one of the bodies of space which our projectile keeps within its attraction, and which will accompany it to the moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0968">&#34;What astonishes me,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;is that the specific weight of the body, which is certainly less than that of the projectile, allows it to keep so perfectly on a level with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0969">&#34;Nicholl,&#34; replied Barbicane, after a moment&#39;s reflection, &#34;I do not know what the object is, but I do know why it maintains our level.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0970">&#34;And why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0971">&#34;Because we are floating in space, my dear captain, and in space bodies fall or move (which is the same thing) with equal speed whatever be their weight or form; it is the air, which by its resistance creates these differences in weight. </span>
      <span id="f0972">When you create a vacuum in a tube, the objects you send through it, grains of dust or grains of lead, fall with the same rapidity. </span>
      <span id="f0973">Here in space is the same cause and the same effect.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0974">&#34;Just so,&#34; said Nicholl, &#34;and everything we throw out of the projectile will accompany it until it reaches the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0975">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0976">fools that we are!&#34; exclaimed Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0977">&#34;Why that expletive?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0978">&#34;Because we might have filled the projectile with useful objects, books, instruments, tools, &amp;c. </span>
      <span id="f0979">We could have thrown them all out, and all would have followed in our train. </span>
      <span id="f0980">But happy thought! </span>
      <span id="f0981">Why cannot we walk outside like the meteor? </span>
      <span id="f0982">Why cannot we launch into space through the scuttle? </span>
      <span id="f0983">What enjoyment it would be to feel oneself thus suspended in ether, more favoured than the birds who must use their wings to keep themselves up!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0984">&#34;Granted,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;but how to breathe?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0985">&#34;Hang the air, to fail so inopportunely!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0986">&#34;But if it did not fail, Michel, your density being less than that of the projectile, you would soon be left behind.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0987">&#34;Then we must remain in our car?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0988">&#34;We must!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0989">&#34;Ah!&#34; exclaimed Michel, in a loud voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0990">&#34;What is the matter,&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0991">&#34;I know, I guess, what this pretended meteor is! </span>
      <span id="f0992">It is no asteroid which is accompanying us! </span>
      <span id="f0993">It is not a piece of a planet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0994">&#34;What is it then?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0995">&#34;It is our unfortunate dog! </span>
      <span id="f0996">It is Diana&#39;s husband!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0997">Indeed, this deformed, unrecognizable object, reduced to nothing, was the body of Satellite, flattened like a bagpipe without wind, and ever mounting, mounting!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>