<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f0998">CHAPTER VII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0999">A MOMENT OF INTOXICATION.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1000">Thus a phenomenon, curious but explicable, was happening under these strange conditions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1001">Every object thrown from the projectile would follow the same course and never stop until it did. </span>
      <span id="f1002">There was a subject for conversation which the whole evening could not exhaust.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1003">Besides, the excitement of the three travellers increased as they drew near the end of their journey. </span>
      <span id="f1004">They expected unforeseen incidents, and new phenomena; and nothing would have astonished them in the frame of mind they then were in. </span>
      <span id="f1005">Their over-excited imagination went faster than the projectile, whose speed was evidently diminishing, though insensibly to themselves. </span>
      <span id="f1006">But the moon grew larger to their eyes, and they fancied if they stretched out their hands they could seize it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1007">The next day, the 5th of November, at five in the morning, all three were on foot. </span>
      <span id="f1008">That day was to be the last of their journey, if all calculations were true. </span>
      <span id="f1009">That very night, at twelve o&#39;clock, in eighteen hours, exactly at the full moon, they would reach its brilliant disc. </span>
      <span id="f1010">The next midnight would see that journey ended, the most extraordinary of ancient or modern times. </span>
      <span id="f1011">Thus from the first of the morning, through the scuttles silvered by its rays, they saluted the orb of night with a confident and joyous hurrah.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1012">The moon was advancing majestically along the starry firmament. </span>
      <span id="f1013">A few more degrees, and she would reach the exact point where her meeting with the projectile was to take place.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1014">According to his own observations, Barbicane reckoned that they would land on her northern hemisphere, where stretch immense planes, and where mountains are rare. </span>
      <span id="f1015">A favourable circumstance if, as they thought, the lunar atmosphere was stored only in its depths.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1016">&#34;Besides,&#34; observed Michel Ardan, &#34;a plain is easier to disembark upon than a mountain. </span>
      <span id="f1017">A Selenite, deposited in Europe on the summit of Mont Blanc, or in Asia on the top of the Himalayas, would not be quite in the right place.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1018">&#34;And,&#34; added Captain Nicholl, &#34;on a flat ground, the projectile will remain motionless when it has once touched; whereas on a declivity it would roll like an avalanche, and not being squirrels we should not come out safe and sound. </span>
      <span id="f1019">So it is all for the best.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1020">Indeed, the success of the audacious attempt no longer appeared doubtful. </span>
      <span id="f1021">But Barbicane was preoccupied with one thought; but not wishing to make his companions uneasy, he kept silence on the subject.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1022">The direction the projectile was taking towards the moon&#39;s northern hemisphere, showed that her course had been slightly altered. </span>
      <span id="f1023">The discharge, mathematically calculated, would carry the projectile to the very centre of the lunar disc. </span>
      <span id="f1024">If it did not land there, there must have been some deviation. </span>
      <span id="f1025">What had caused it? </span>
      <span id="f1026">Barbicane could neither imagine nor determine the importance of the deviation, for there were no points to go by.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1027">He hoped, however, that it would have no other result than that of bringing them near the upper border of the moon, a region more suitable for landing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1028">Without imparting his uneasiness to his companions, Barbicane contented himself with constantly observing the moon, in order to see whether the course of the projectile would not be altered; for the situation would have been terrible if it failed in its aim, and being carried beyond the disc should be launched into interplanetary space. </span>
      <span id="f1029">At that moment, the moon, instead of appearing flat like a disc, showed its convexity. </span>
      <span id="f1030">If the sun&#39;s rays had struck it obliquely, the shadow thrown would have brought out the high mountains, which would have been clearly detached. </span>
      <span id="f1031">The eye might have gazed into the crater&#39;s gaping abysses, and followed the capricious fissures which wound through the immense plains. </span>
      <span id="f1032">But all relief was as yet levelled in intense brilliancy. </span>
      <span id="f1033">They could scarcely distinguish those large spots which give to the moon the appearance of a human face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1034">&#34;Face, indeed!&#34; said Michel Ardan; &#34;but I am sorry for the amiable sister of Apollo. </span>
      <span id="f1035">A very pitted face!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1036">But the travellers, now so near the end, were incessantly observing this new world. </span>
      <span id="f1037">They imagined themselves walking through its unknown countries, climbing its highest peaks, descending into its lowest depths. </span>
      <span id="f1038">Here and there they fancied they saw vast seas, scarcely kept together under so rarefied an atmosphere, and watercourses emptying the mountain tributaries. </span>
      <span id="f1039">Leaning over the abyss, they hoped to catch some sounds from that orb for ever mute in the solitude of space. </span>
      <span id="f1040">That last day left them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1041">They took down the most trifling details. </span>
      <span id="f1042">A vague uneasiness took possession of them as they neared the end. </span>
      <span id="f1043">This uneasiness would have been doubled had they felt how their speed had decreased. </span>
      <span id="f1044">It would have seemed to them quite insufficient to carry them to the end. </span>
      <span id="f1045">It was because the projectile then &#34;weighed&#34; almost nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1046">Its weight was ever decreasing, and would be entirely annihilated on that line where the lunar and terrestrial attractions would neutralize each other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1047">But in spite of his preoccupation, Michel Ardan did not forget to prepare the morning repast with his accustomed punctuality. </span>
      <span id="f1048">They ate with a good appetite. </span>
      <span id="f1049">Nothing was so excellent as the soup liquefied by the heat of the gas; nothing better than the preserved meat. </span>
      <span id="f1050">Some glasses of good French wine crowned the repast, causing Michel Ardan to remark that the lunar vines, warmed by that ardent sun, ought to distil even more generous wines; that is, if they existed. </span>
      <span id="f1051">In any case, the far-seeing Frenchman had taken care not to forget in his collection some precious cuttings of the Médoc and Côte d&#39;Or, upon which he founded his hopes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1052">Reiset and Regnault&#39;s apparatus worked with great regularity. </span>
      <span id="f1053">Not an atom of carbonic acid resisted the potash; and as to the oxygen, Captain Nicholl said &#34;it was of the first quality.&#34; The little watery vapour enclosed in the projectile mixing with the air tempered the dryness; and many apartments in London, Paris, or New York, and many theatres, were certainly not in such a healthy condition.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1054">But that it might act with regularity, the apparatus must be kept in perfect order; so each morning Michel visited the escape regulators, tried the taps, and regulated the heat of the gas by the pyrometer. </span>
      <span id="f1055">Everything had gone well up to that time, and the travellers, imitating the worthy Joseph T. </span>
      <span id="f1056">Maston, began to acquire a degree of embonpoint, which would have rendered them unrecognizable if their imprisonment had been prolonged to some months. </span>
      <span id="f1057">In a word, they behaved like chickens in a coop; they were getting fat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1058">In looking through the scuttle Barbicane saw the spectre of the dog, and other divers objects which had been thrown from the projectile obstinately following them. </span>
      <span id="f1059">Diana howled lugubriously on seeing the remains of Satellite, which seemed as motionless as if they reposed on the solid earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1060">&#34;Do you know, my friends,&#34; said Michel Ardan, &#34;that if one of us had succumbed to the shock consequent on departure, we should have had a great deal of trouble to bury him? </span>
      <span id="f1061">What am I saying? </span>
      <span id="f1062">to _etherize_ him, as here ether takes the place of earth. </span>
      <span id="f1063">You see the accusing body would have followed us into space like a remorse.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1064">&#34;That would have been sad,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1065">&#34;Ah!&#34; continued Michel, &#34;what I regret is not being able to take a walk outside. </span>
      <span id="f1066">What voluptuousness to float amid this radiant ether, to bathe oneself in it, to wrap oneself in the sun&#39;s pure rays. </span>
      <span id="f1067">If Barbicane had only thought of furnishing us with a diving apparatus and an air-pump, I could have ventured out and assumed fanciful attitudes of feigned monsters on the top of the projectile.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1068">&#34;Well, old Michel,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;you would not have made a feigned monster long, for in spite of your diver&#39;s dress, swollen by the expansion of air within you, you would have burst like a shell, or rather like a balloon which has risen too high. </span>
      <span id="f1069">So do not regret it, and do not forget this—as long as we float in space, all sentimental walks beyond the projectile are forbidden.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1070">Michel Ardan allowed himself to be convinced to a certain extent. </span>
      <span id="f1071">He admitted that the thing was difficult but not _impossible_, a word which he never uttered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1072">The conversation passed from this subject to another, not failing for an instant. </span>
      <span id="f1073">It seemed to the three friends as though, under present conditions, ideas shot up in their brains as leaves shoot at the first warmth of spring. </span>
      <span id="f1074">They felt bewildered. </span>
      <span id="f1075">In the middle of the questions and answers which crossed each other, Nicholl put one question which did not find an immediate solution.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1076">&#34;Ah, indeed!&#34; said he; &#34;it is all very well to go to the moon, but how to get back again?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1077">His two interlocutors looked surprised. </span>
      <span id="f1078">One would have thought that this possibility now occurred to them for the first time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1079">&#34;What do you mean by that, Nicholl?&#34; asked Barbicane gravely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1080">&#34;To ask for means to leave a country,&#34; added Michel, &#34;when we have not yet arrived there, seems to me rather inopportune.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1081">&#34;I do not say that, wishing to draw back,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;but I repeat my question, and I ask, &#39;How shall we return?&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1082">&#34;I know nothing about it,&#34; answered Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1083">&#34;And I,&#34; said Michel, &#34;if I had known how to return, I would never have started.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1084">&#34;There&#39;s an answer!&#34; cried Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1085">&#34;I quite approve of Michel&#39;s words,&#34; said Barbicane; &#34;and add, that the question has no real interest. </span>
      <span id="f1086">Later, when we think it advisable to return, we will take counsel together. </span>
      <span id="f1087">If the Columbiad is not there, the projectile will be.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1088">&#34;That is a step certainly. </span>
      <span id="f1089">A ball without a gun!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1090">&#34;The gun,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;can be manufactured. </span>
      <span id="f1091">The powder can be made. </span>
      <span id="f1092">Neither metals, saltpetre, nor coal can fail in the depths of the moon, and we need only go 8000 leagues in order to fall upon the terrestrial globe by virtue of the mere laws of weight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1093">&#34;Enough,&#34; said Michel with animation. </span>
      <span id="f1094">&#34;Let it be no longer a question of returning: we have already entertained it too long. </span>
      <span id="f1095">As to communicating with our former earthly colleagues, that will not be difficult.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1096">&#34;And how?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1097">&#34;By means of meteors launched by lunar volcanos.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1098">&#34;Well thought of, Michel,&#34; said Barbicane in a convinced tone of voice. </span>
      <span id="f1099">&#34;Laplace has calculated that a force five times greater than that of our gun would suffice to send a meteor from the moon to the earth, and there is not one volcano which has not a greater power of propulsion than that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1100">&#34;Hurrah!&#34; exclaimed Michel; &#34;these meteors are handy postmen, and cost nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1101">And how we shall be able to laugh at the post-office administration. </span>
      <span id="f1102">But now I think of it—&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1103">&#34;What do you think of?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1104">&#34;A capital idea. </span>
      <span id="f1105">Why did we not fasten a thread to our projectile, and we could have exchanged telegrams with the earth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1106">&#34;The deuce!&#34; answered Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f1107">&#34;Do you consider the weight of a thread 250,000 miles long nothing?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1108">&#34;As nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1109">They could have trebled the Columbiad&#39;s charge; they could have quadrupled or quintupled it!&#34; exclaimed Michel, with whom the verb took a higher intonation each time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1110">&#34;There is but one little objection to make to your proposition,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;which is that, during the rotary motion of the globe, our thread would have wound itself round it like a chain on a capstan, and that it would inevitably have brought us to the ground.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1111">&#34;By the thirty-nine stars of the Union!&#34; said Michel, &#34;I have nothing but impracticable ideas to-day; ideas worthy of J. </span>
      <span id="f1112">T. </span>
      <span id="f1113">Maston. </span>
      <span id="f1114">But I have a notion that, if we do not return to earth, J. </span>
      <span id="f1115">T. </span>
      <span id="f1116">Maston will be able to come to us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1117">&#34;Yes, he&#39;ll come,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;he is a worthy and a courageous comrade. </span>
      <span id="f1118">Besides, what is easier? </span>
      <span id="f1119">Is not the Columbiad still buried in the soil of Florida? </span>
      <span id="f1120">Is cotton and nitric acid wanted wherewith to manufacture the pyroxile? </span>
      <span id="f1121">Will not the moon again pass to the zenith of Florida? </span>
      <span id="f1122">In eighteen years&#39; time will she not occupy exactly the same place as to-day?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1123">&#34;Yes,&#34; continued Michel, &#34;yes, Marston will come, and with him our friends Elphinstone, Blomsberry, all the members of the Gun Club, and they will be well received. </span>
      <span id="f1124">And by and by they will run trains of projectiles between the earth and the moon! </span>
      <span id="f1125">Hurrah for J. </span>
      <span id="f1126">T. </span>
      <span id="f1127">Maston!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1128">It is probable that, if the Hon. </span>
      <span id="f1129">J. </span>
      <span id="f1130">T. </span>
      <span id="f1131">Maston did not hear the hurrahs uttered in his honour, his ears at least tingled. </span>
      <span id="f1132">What was he doing then? </span>
      <span id="f1133">Doubtless posted in the Rocky Mountains, at the station of Long&#39;s Peak, he was trying to find the invisible projectile gravitating in space. </span>
      <span id="f1134">If he was thinking of his dear companions, we must allow that they were not far behind him; and that, under the influence of a strange excitement, they were devoting to him their best thoughts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1135">But whence this excitement, which was evidently growing upon the tenants of the projectile? </span>
      <span id="f1136">Their sobriety could not be doubted. </span>
      <span id="f1137">This strange irritation of the brain, must it be attributed to the peculiar circumstances under which they found themselves, to their proximity to the orb of night, from which only a few hours separated them, to some secret influence of the moon acting upon their nervous system? </span>
      <span id="f1138">Their faces were as rosy as if they had been exposed to the roaring flames of an oven; their voices resounded in loud accents; their words escaped like a champagne cork driven out by carbonic acid; their gestures became annoying, they wanted so much room to perform them; and, strange to say, they none of them noticed this great tension of the mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1139">&#34;Now,&#34; said Nicholl, in a short tone, &#34;now that I do not know whether we shall ever return from the moon, I want to know what we are going to do there?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1140">&#34;What we are going to do there?&#34; replied Barbicane, stamping with his foot as if he was in a fencing saloon; &#34;I do not know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1141">&#34;You do not know!&#34; exclaimed Michel, with a bellow which provoked a sonorous echo in the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1142">&#34;No, I have not even thought about it,&#34; retorted Barbicane, in the same loud tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1143">&#34;Well, I know,&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1144">&#34;Speak, then,&#34; cried Nicholl, who could no longer contain the growling of his voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1145">&#34;I shall speak if it suits me,&#34; exclaimed Michel, seizing his companions&#39; arms with violence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1146">&#34;_It must_ suit you,&#34; said Barbicane, with an eye on fire and a threatening hand. </span>
      <span id="f1147">&#34;It was you who drew us into this frightful journey, and we want to know what for.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1148">&#34;Yes,&#34; said the captain, &#34;now that I do not know where I am going, I want to know _why_ I am going.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1149">&#34;Why?&#34; exclaimed Michel, jumping a yard high, &#34;why? </span>
      <span id="f1150">To take possession of the moon in the name of the United States; to add a fortieth State to the Union; to colonize the lunar regions; to cultivate them, to people them, to transport thither all the prodigies of art, of science, and industry; to civilize the Selenites, unless they are more civilized than we are; and to constitute them a republic, if they are not already one!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1151">&#34;And if there are no Selenites?&#34; retorted Nicholl, who, under the influence of this unaccountable intoxication, was very contradictory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1152">&#34;Who said that there were no Selenites?&#34; exclaimed Michel in a threatening tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1153">&#34;I do,&#34; howled Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1154">&#34;Captain,&#34; said Michel, &#34;do not repeat that insolence, or I will knock your teeth down your throat!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1155">The two adversaries were going to fall upon each other, and the incoherent discussion threatened to merge into a fight, when Barbicane intervened with one bound.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1156">&#34;Stop, miserable men,&#34; said he, separating his two companions; &#34;if there are no Selenites, we will do without them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1157">&#34;Yes,&#34; exclaimed Michel, who was not particular; &#34;yes, we will do without them. </span>
      <span id="f1158">We have only to make Selenites. </span>
      <span id="f1159">Down with the Selenites!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1160">&#34;The empire of the moon belongs to us,&#34; said Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f1161">&#34;Let us three constitute the republic.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1162">&#34;I will be the congress,&#34; cried Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1163">&#34;And I the senate,&#34; retorted Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1164">&#34;And Barbicane, the president,&#34; howled Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1165">&#34;Not a president elected by the nation,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1166">&#34;Very well, a president elected by the congress,&#34; cried Michel; &#34;and as I am the congress, you are unanimously elected!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1167">&#34;Hurrah! </span>
      <span id="f1168">hurrah! </span>
      <span id="f1169">hurrah! </span>
      <span id="f1170">for President Barbicane,&#34; exclaimed Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1171">&#34;Hip! </span>
      <span id="f1172">hip! </span>
      <span id="f1173">hip!&#34; vociferated Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1174">Then the President and the Senate struck up in a tremendous voice the popular song &#34;Yankee Doodle,&#34; whilst from the Congress resounded the masculine tones of the &#34;Marseillaise.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1175">Then they struck up a frantic dance, with maniacal gestures, idiotic stampings, and somersaults like those of the boneless clowns in the circus. </span>
      <span id="f1176">Diana, joining in the dance, and howling in her turn, jumped to the top of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1177">An unaccountable flapping of wings was then heard amidst most fantastic cock-crows, while five or six hens fluttered like bats against the walls.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1178">Then the three travelling companions, acted upon by some unaccountable influence above that of intoxication, inflamed by the air which had set their respiratory apparatus on fire, fell motionless to the bottom of the projectile.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>