<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1179">CHAPTER VIII.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1180">AT SEVENTY-EIGHT THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AND       FOURTEEN LEAGUES.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1181">What had happened? </span>
      <span id="f1182">Whence the cause of this singular intoxication, the consequences of which might have been very disastrous? </span>
      <span id="f1183">A simple blunder of Michel&#39;s, which, fortunately, Nicholl was able to correct in time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1184">After a perfect swoon, which lasted some minutes, the captain, recovering first, soon collected his scattered senses. </span>
      <span id="f1185">Although he had breakfasted only two hours before, he felt a gnawing hunger, as if he had not eaten anything for several days. </span>
      <span id="f1186">Everything about him, stomach and brain, were overexcited to the highest degree. </span>
      <span id="f1187">He got up and demanded from Michel a supplementary repast. </span>
      <span id="f1188">Michel, utterly done up, did not answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1189">Nicholl then tried to prepare some tea destined to help the absorption of a dozen sandwiches. </span>
      <span id="f1190">He first tried to get some fire, and struck a match sharply. </span>
      <span id="f1191">What was his surprise to see the sulphur shine with so extraordinary a brilliancy as to be almost unbearable to the eye. </span>
      <span id="f1192">From the gas-burner which he lit rose a flame equal to a jet of electric light.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1193">A revelation dawned on Nicholl&#39;s mind. </span>
      <span id="f1194">That intensity of light, the physiological troubles which had arisen in him, the overexcitement of all his moral and quarrelsome faculties,—he understood all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1195">&#34;The oxygen!&#34; he exclaimed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1196">And leaning over the air apparatus, he saw that the tap was allowing the scentless colourless gas to escape freely, life-giving, but in its pure state producing the gravest disorders in the system. </span>
      <span id="f1197">Michel had blunderingly opened the tap of the apparatus to the full.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1198">Nicholl hastened to stop the escape of oxygen with which the atmosphere was saturated, which would have been the death of the travellers, not by suffocation, but by combustion. </span>
      <span id="f1199">An hour later, the air less charged with it restored the lungs to their normal condition. </span>
      <span id="f1200">By degrees the three friends recovered from their intoxication; but they were obliged to sleep themselves sober over their oxygen as a drunkard does over his wine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1201">When Michel learnt his share of the responsibility of this incident, he was not much disconcerted. </span>
      <span id="f1202">This unexpected drunkenness broke the monotony of the journey. </span>
      <span id="f1203">Many foolish things had been said while under its influence, but also quickly forgotten.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1204">&#34;And then,&#34; added the merry Frenchman, &#34;I am not sorry to have tasted a little of this heady gas. </span>
      <span id="f1205">Do you know, my friends, that a curious establishment might be founded with rooms of oxygen, where people whose system is weakened could for a few hours live a more active life. </span>
      <span id="f1206">Fancy parties where the room was saturated with this heroic fluid, theatres where it should be kept at high pressure; what passion in the souls of the actors and spectators! </span>
      <span id="f1207">what fire, what enthusiasm! </span>
      <span id="f1208">And if, instead of an assembly only a whole people could be saturated, what activity in its functions, what a supplement to life it would derive. </span>
      <span id="f1209">From an exhausted nation they might make a great and strong one, and I know more than one state in old Europe which ought to put itself under the regime of oxygen for the sake of its health!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1210">Michel spoke with so much animation that one might have fancied that the tap was still too open. </span>
      <span id="f1211">But a few words from Barbicane soon scattered his enthusiasm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1212">&#34;That is all very well, friend Michel,&#34; said he, &#34;but will you inform us where these chickens came from which have mixed themselves up in our concert?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1213">&#34;Those chickens?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1214">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1215">Indeed, half a dozen chickens and a fine cock were walking about, flapping their wings and chattering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1216">&#34;Ah, the awkward things!&#34; exclaimed Michel. </span>
      <span id="f1217">&#34;The oxygen has made them revolt.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1218">&#34;But what do you want to do with these chickens?&#34; asked Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1219">&#34;To acclimatize them in the moon, by Jove!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1220">&#34;Then why did you hide them?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1221">&#34;A joke, my worthy president, a simple joke, which has proved a miserable failure. </span>
      <span id="f1222">I wanted to set them free on the lunar continent, without saying anything. </span>
      <span id="f1223">Oh, what would have been your amazement on seeing these earthly-winged animals pecking in the lunar fields!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1224">&#34;You rascal, you unmitigated rascal,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;you do not want oxygen to mount to the head. </span>
      <span id="f1225">You are always what _we_ were under the influence of the gas; you are always foolish!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1226">&#34;Ah, who says that we were not wise then?&#34; replied Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1227">After this philosophical reflection, the three friends set about restoring the order of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1228">Chickens and cock were reinstated in their coup. </span>
      <span id="f1229">But whilst proceeding with this operation, Barbicane and his two companions had a most desired perception of a new phenomenon. </span>
      <span id="f1230">From the moment of leaving the earth, their own weight, that of the projectile, and the objects it enclosed, had been subject to an increasing diminution. </span>
      <span id="f1231">If they could not prove this loss of the projectile, a moment would arrive when it would be sensibly felt upon themselves and the utensils and instruments they used.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1232">It is needless to say that a _scale_ would not show this loss; for the weight destined to weigh the object would have lost exactly as much as the object itself; but a spring steelyard for example, the tension of which was independent of the attraction, would have given a just estimate of this loss.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1233">We know that the attraction, otherwise called the _weight_, is in proportion to the densities of bodies, and inversely as the squares of the distances. </span>
      <span id="f1234">Hence this effect: If the earth had been alone in space, if the other celestial bodies had been suddenly annihilated, the projectile, according to Newton&#39;s laws, would weigh less as it got farther from the earth, but without ever losing its weight _entirely_, for the terrestrial attraction would always have made itself felt, at whatever distance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1235">But, in reality, a time must come when the projectile would no longer be subject to the law of weight, after allowing for the other celestial bodies whose effect could not be set down as zero. </span>
      <span id="f1236">Indeed, the projectile&#39;s course was being traced between the earth and the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1237">As it distanced the earth, the terrestrial attraction diminished: but the lunar attraction rose in proportion. </span>
      <span id="f1238">There must then come a point where these two attractions would neutralize each other: the projectile would possess weight no longer. </span>
      <span id="f1239">If the moon&#39;s and the earth&#39;s densities had been equal, this point would have been at an equal distance between the two orbs. </span>
      <span id="f1240">But taking the different densities into consideration, it was easy to reckon that this point would be situated at 47-60ths of the whole journey, i.e. </span>
      <span id="f1241">at 78,114 leagues from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1242">At this point, a body having no principle of speed or displacement in itself, would remain immovable for ever, being attracted equally by both orbs, and not being drawn more towards one than towards the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1243">Now if the projectile&#39;s impulsive force had been correctly calculated, it would attain this point without speed, having lost all trace of weight, as well as all the objects within it. </span>
      <span id="f1244">What would happen then? </span>
      <span id="f1245">Three hypotheses presented themselves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1246">1. </span>
      <span id="f1247">Either it would retain a certain amount of motion, and pass the point of equal attraction, and fall upon the moon by virtue of the excess of the lunar attraction over the terrestrial.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1248">2. </span>
      <span id="f1249">Or, its speed failing, and unable to reach the point of equal attraction, it would fall upon the moon by virtue of the excess of the lunar attraction over the terrestrial.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1250">3. </span>
      <span id="f1251">Or, lastly, animated with sufficient speed to enable it to reach the neutral point, but not sufficient to pass it, it would remain for ever suspended in that spot like the pretended tomb of Mahomet, between the zenith and the nadir.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1252">Such was their situation; and Barbicane clearly explained the consequences to his travelling companions, which greatly interested them. </span>
      <span id="f1253">But how should they know when the projectile had reached this neutral point situated at that distance, especially when neither themselves, nor the objects enclosed in the projectile, would be any longer subject to the laws of weight?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1254">Up to this time, the travellers, whilst admitting that this action was constantly decreasing, had not yet become sensible to its total absence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1255">But that day, about eleven o&#39;clock in the morning, Nicholl having accidentally let a glass slip from his hand, the glass, instead of falling, remained suspended in the air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1256">&#34;Ah!&#34; exclaimed Michel Ardan, &#34;that is rather an amusing piece of natural philosophy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1257">And immediately divers other objects, firearms and bottles, abandoned to themselves, held themselves up as by enchantment. </span>
      <span id="f1258">Diana too, placed in space by Michel, reproduced, but without any trick, the wonderful suspension practised by Caston and Robert Houdin. </span>
      <span id="f1259">Indeed the dog did not seem to know that she was floating in air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">The three adventurous companions were surprised and stupefied, despite their scientific reasonings. </span>
      <span id="f1261">They felt themselves being carried into the domain of wonders! </span>
      <span id="f1262">they felt that _weight_ was really wanting to their bodies. </span>
      <span id="f1263">If they stretched out their arms, they did not attempt to fall. </span>
      <span id="f1264">Their heads shook on their shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f1265">Their feet no longer clung to the floor of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1266">They were like drunken men having no stability in themselves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1267">Fancy has depicted men without reflection, others without shadow. </span>
      <span id="f1268">But here _reality,_ by the neutralisation of attractive forces, produced men in whom nothing had any weight, and who weighed nothing themselves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1269">Suddenly Michel, taking a spring, left the floor and remained suspended in the air, like Murillo&#39;s monk of the _Cusine des Anges._</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1270">The two friends joined him instantly, and all three formed a miraculous &#34;Ascension&#34; in the centre of the projectile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1271">&#34;Is it to be believed? </span>
      <span id="f1272">is it probable? </span>
      <span id="f1273">is it possible?&#34; exclaimed Michel; &#34;and yet it is so. </span>
      <span id="f1274">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1275">if Raphael had seen us thus, what an &#39;Assumption&#39; he would have thrown upon canvas!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1276">&#34;The &#39;Assumption&#39; cannot last,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1277">&#34;If the projectile passes the neutral point, the lunar attraction will draw us to the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1278">&#34;Then our feet will be upon the roof,&#34; replied Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1279">&#34;No,&#34; said Barbicane, &#34;because the projectile&#39;s centre of gravity is very low; it will only turn by degrees.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1280">&#34;Then all our portables will be upset from top to bottom, that is a fact.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1281">&#34;Calm yourself, Michel,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;no upset is to be feared; not a thing will move, for the projectile&#39;s evolution will be imperceptible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1282">&#34;Just so,&#34; continued Barbicane; &#34;and when it has passed the point of equal attraction, its base, being the heavier, will draw it perpendicularly to the moon; but, in order that this phenomenon should take place, we must have passed the neutral line.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1283">&#34;Pass the neutral line!&#34; cried Michel; &#34;then let us do as the sailors do when they cross the equator.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1284">A slight side movement brought Michel back towards the padded side; thence he took a bottle and glasses, placed them &#34;in space&#34; before his companions, and, drinking merrily, they saluted the line with a triple hurrah. </span>
      <span id="f1285">The influence of these attractions scarcely lasted an hour; the travellers felt themselves insensibly drawn towards the floor, and Barbicane fancied that the conical end of the projectile was varying a little from its normal direction towards the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1286">By an inverse motion the base was approaching first; the lunar attraction was prevailing over the terrestrial; the fall towards the moon was beginning, almost imperceptibly as yet, but by degrees the attractive force would become stronger, the fall would be more decided, the projectile, drawn by its base, would turn its cone to the earth, and fall with ever-increasing speed on to the surface of the Selenite continent; their destination would then be attained. </span>
      <span id="f1287">Now nothing could prevent the success of their enterprise, and Nicholl and Michel Ardan shared Barbicane&#39;s joy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1288">Then they chatted of all the phenomena which had astonished them one after the other, particularly the neutralization of the laws of weight. </span>
      <span id="f1289">Michel Ardan, always enthusiastic, drew conclusions which were purely fanciful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1290">&#34;Ah, my worthy friends,&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;what progress we should make if on earth we could throw off some of that weight, some of that chain which binds us to her; it would be the prisoner set at liberty; no more fatigue of either arms or legs. </span>
      <span id="f1291">Or, if it is true that in order to fly on the earth&#39;s surface, to keep oneself suspended in the air merely by the play of the muscles, there requires a strength a hundred and fifty times greater than that which we possess, a simple act of volition, a caprice, would bear us into space, if attraction did not exist.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1292">&#34;Just so,&#34; said Nicholl, smiling; &#34;if we could succeed in suppressing weight as they suppress pain by anæsthesia, that would change the face of modern society!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1293">&#34;Yes,&#34; cried Michel, full of his subject, &#34;destroy weight, and no more burdens!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1294">&#34;Well said,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;but if nothing had any weight, nothing would keep in its place, not even your hat on your head, worthy Michel; nor your house, whose stones only adhere by weight; not a boat, whose stability on the water is caused only by weight; not even the ocean, whose waves would no longer be equalized by terrestrial attraction; and lastly, not even the _atmosphere,_ whose atoms, being no longer held in their places, would disperse in space!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1295">&#34;That is tiresome,&#34; retorted Michel; &#34;nothing like these matter-of-fact people for bringing one back to the bare reality.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1296">&#34;But console yourself, Michel,&#34; continued Barbicane, &#34;for if no orb exists from whence all laws of weight are banished, you are at least going to visit one where it is much less than on the earth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1297">&#34;The moon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1298">&#34;Yes, the moon, on whose surface objects weigh six times less than on the earth, a phenomenon easy to prove.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1299">&#34;And we shall feel it?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1300">&#34;Evidently, as 200 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f1301">will only weigh 30 pounds on the surface of the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1302">&#34;And our muscular strength will not diminish?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1303">&#34;Not at all; instead of jumping one yard high, you will rise eighteen feet high.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1304">&#34;But we shall be regular Herculeses in the moon!&#34; exclaimed Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1305">&#34;Yes,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;for if the height of the Selenites is in proportion to the density of their globe, they will be scarcely a foot high.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1306">&#34;Lilliputians!&#34; ejaculated Michel; &#34;I shall play the part of Gulliver. </span>
      <span id="f1307">We are going to realize the fable of the giants. </span>
      <span id="f1308">This is the advantage of leaving one&#39;s own planet and overrunning the solar world.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1309">&#34;One moment, Michel,&#34; answered Barbicane; &#34;if you wish to play the part of Gulliver, only visit the inferior planets, such as Mercury, Venus, or Mars, whose density is a little less than that of the earth; but do not venture into the great planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune; for there the order will be changed, and you will become Lilliputian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1310">&#34;And in the sun?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1311">&#34;In the sun, if its density is thirteen hundred and twenty-four thousand times greater, and the attraction is twenty-seven times greater than on the surface of our globe, keeping everything in proportion, the inhabitants ought to be at least two hundred feet high.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1312">&#34;By Jove!&#34; exclaimed Michel; &#34;I should be nothing more than a pigmy, a shrimp!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1313">&#34;Gulliver with the giants,&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1314">&#34;Just so,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1315">&#34;And it would not be quite useless to carry some pieces of artillery to defend oneself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1316">&#34;Good,&#34; replied Nicholl; &#34;your projectiles would have no effect on the sun; they would fall back on the earth after some minutes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1317">&#34;That is a strong remark.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1318">&#34;It is certain,&#34; replied Barbicane; &#34;the attraction is so great on this enormous orb, that an object weighing 70,000 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f1319">on the earth would weigh but 1920 lbs. </span>
      <span id="f1320">on the surface of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f1321">If you were to fall upon it you would weigh—let me see—about 5000 lbs., a weight which you would never be able to raise again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1322">&#34;The devil!&#34; said Michel; &#34;one would want a portable crane. </span>
      <span id="f1323">However, we will be satisfied with the moon for the present; there at least we shall cut a great figure. </span>
      <span id="f1324">We will see about the sun by and by.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>