<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Title</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <p>
      <span id="f1325">CHAPTER IX.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1326">THE CONSEQUENCES OF A DEVIATION.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1327">Barbicane had now no fear of the issue of the journey, at least as far as the projectile&#39;s impulsive force was concerned; its own speed would carry it beyond the neutral line; it would certainly not return to earth; it would certainly not remain motionless on the line of attraction. </span>
      <span id="f1328">One single hypothesis remained to be realized, the arrival of the projectile at its destination by the action of the lunar attraction.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1329">It was in reality a fall of 8296 leagues on an orb, it is true, where weight could only be reckoned at one-sixth of terrestrial weight; a formidable fall, nevertheless, and one against which every precaution must be taken without delay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1330">These precautions were of two sorts, some to deaden the shock when the projectile should touch the lunar soil, others to delay the fall, and consequently make it less violent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1331">To deaden the shock, it was a pity that Barbicane was no longer able to employ the means which had so ably weakened the shock at departure, that is to say, by water used as springs and the partition-breaks.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1332">The partitions still existed but water failed, for they could not use their reserve, which was precious, in case during the first days the liquid element should be found wanting on lunar soil.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1333">And indeed this reserve would have been quite insufficient for a spring. </span>
      <span id="f1334">The layer of water stored in the projectile at their departure, and on which the waterproof disc lay, occupied no less than three feet in depth, and spread over a surface of not less than fifty-four square feet. </span>
      <span id="f1335">Besides, the cistern did not contain one fifth part of it; they must therefore give up this efficient means of deadening the shock of arrival. </span>
      <span id="f1336">Happily, Barbicane, not content with employing water, had furnished the movable disc with strong spring plugs, destined to lessen the shock against the base after the breaking of the horizontal partitions. </span>
      <span id="f1337">These plugs still existed; they had only to readjust them and replace the movable disc; every piece, easy to handle, as their weight was now scarcely felt, was quickly mounted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1338">The different pieces were fitted without trouble, it being only a matter of bolts and screws; tools were not wanting, and soon the reinstated disc lay on its steel plugs, like a table on its legs. </span>
      <span id="f1339">One inconvenience resulted from the replacing of the disc, the lower window was blocked up; thus it was impossible for the travellers to observe the moon from that opening while they were being precipitated perpendicularly upon her; but they were obliged to give it up; even by the side openings they could still see vast lunar regions, as an aeronaut sees the earth from his car.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1340">This replacing of the disc was at least an hour&#39;s work. </span>
      <span id="f1341">It was past twelve when all preparations were finished. </span>
      <span id="f1342">Barbicane took fresh observations on the inclination of the projectile, but to his annoyance it had not turned over sufficiently for its fall; it seemed to take a curve parallel to the lunar disc. </span>
      <span id="f1343">The orb of night shone splendidly into space, while opposite, the orb of day blazed with fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1344">Their situation began to make them uneasy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1345">&#34;Are we reaching our destination?&#34; said Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1346">&#34;Let us act as if we were about reaching it,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1347">&#34;You are sceptical,&#34; retorted Michel Ardan. </span>
      <span id="f1348">&#34;We shall arrive, and that, too, quicker than we like.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1349">This answer brought Barbicane back to his preparations, and he occupied himself with placing the contrivances intended to break their descent. </span>
      <span id="f1350">We may remember the scene of the meeting held at Tampa Town, in Florida, when Captain Nicholl came forward as Barbicane&#39;s enemy and Michel Ardan&#39;s adversary. </span>
      <span id="f1351">To Captain Nicholl&#39;s maintaining that the projectile would smash like glass, Michel replied that he would break their fall by means of rockets properly placed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1352">Thus, powerful fireworks, taking their starting-point from the base and bursting outside, could, by producing a recoil, check to a certain degree the projectile&#39;s speed. </span>
      <span id="f1353">These rockets were to burn in space, it is true; but oxygen would not fail them, for they could supply themselves with it, like the lunar volcanoes, the burning of which has never yet been stopped by the want of atmosphere round the moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1354">Barbicane had accordingly supplied himself with these fireworks, enclosed in little steel guns, which could be screwed on to the base of the projectile. </span>
      <span id="f1355">Inside, these guns were flush with the bottom; outside, they protruded about eighteen inches. </span>
      <span id="f1356">There were twenty of them. </span>
      <span id="f1357">An opening left in the disc allowed them to light the match with which each was provided. </span>
      <span id="f1358">All the effect was felt outside. </span>
      <span id="f1359">The burning mixture had been already rammed into each gun. </span>
      <span id="f1360">They had, then, nothing to do but to raise the metallic buffers fixed in the base, and replace them by the guns, which fitted closely in their places.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1361">This new work was finished about three o&#39;clock, and after taking all these precautions there remained but to wait. </span>
      <span id="f1362">But the projectile was perceptibly nearing the moon, and evidently succumbed to her influence to a certain degree; though its own velocity also drew it in an oblique direction. </span>
      <span id="f1363">From these conflicting influences resulted a line which might become a tangent. </span>
      <span id="f1364">But it was certain that the projectile would not fall directly on the moon; for its lower part, by reason of its weight, ought to be turned towards her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1365">Barbicane&#39;s uneasiness increased as he saw his projectile resist the influence of gravitation. </span>
      <span id="f1366">The Unknown was opening before him, the Unknown in interplanetary space. </span>
      <span id="f1367">The man of science thought he had foreseen the only three hypotheses possible—the return to the earth, the return to the moon, or stagnation on the neutral line; and here a fourth hypothesis, big with all the terrors of the Infinite, surged up inopportunely. </span>
      <span id="f1368">To face it without flinching, one must be a resolute savant like Barbicane, a phlegmatic being like Nicholl, or an audacious adventurer like Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1369">Conversation was started upon this subject. </span>
      <span id="f1370">Other men would have considered the question from a practical point of view; they would have asked themselves whither their projectile carriage was carrying them. </span>
      <span id="f1371">Not so with these; they sought for the cause which produced this effect.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1372">&#34;So we have become diverted from our route,&#34; said Michel; &#34;but why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1373">&#34;I very much fear,&#34; answered Nicholl, &#34;that, in spite of all precautions taken, the Columbiad was not fairly pointed. </span>
      <span id="f1374">An error, however small, would be enough to throw us out of the moon&#39;s attraction.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1375">&#34;Then they must have aimed badly?&#34; asked Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1376">&#34;I do not think so,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1377">&#34;The perpendicularity of the gun was exact, its direction to the zenith of the spot incontestible; and the moon passing to the zenith of the spot, we ought to reach it at the full. </span>
      <span id="f1378">There is another reason, but it escapes me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1379">&#34;Are we not arriving too late?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1380">&#34;Too late?&#34; said Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1381">&#34;Yes,&#34; continued Nicholl. </span>
      <span id="f1382">&#34;The Cambridge Observatory&#39;s note says that the transit ought to be accomplished in ninety-seven hours thirteen minutes and twenty seconds; which means to say, that _sooner_ the moon will _not_ be at the point indicated, and that _later_ it will have passed it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1383">&#34;True,&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1384">&#34;But we started the 1st of December, at thirteen minutes and twenty-five seconds to eleven at night; and we ought to arrive on the 5th at midnight, at the exact moment when the moon would be full; and we are now at the 5th of December. </span>
      <span id="f1385">It is now half past three in the evening; half past eight ought to see us at the end of our journey. </span>
      <span id="f1386">Why do we not arrive?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1387">&#34;Might it not be an excess of speed?&#34; answered Nicholl; &#34;for we know now that its initial velocity was greater than they supposed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1388">&#34;No! </span>
      <span id="f1389">a hundred times, No!&#34; replied Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1390">&#34;An excess of speed, if the direction of the projectile had been right, would not have prevented us reaching the moon. </span>
      <span id="f1391">No, there has been a deviation. </span>
      <span id="f1392">We have been turned out of our course.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1393">&#34;By whom? </span>
      <span id="f1394">by what?&#34; asked Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1395">&#34;I cannot say,&#34; replied Barbicane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1396">&#34;Very well, then, Barbicane,&#34; said Michel, &#34;do you wish to know my opinion on the subject of finding out this deviation?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1397">&#34;Speak.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1398">&#34;I would not give half a dollar to know it. </span>
      <span id="f1399">That we have deviated is a fact. </span>
      <span id="f1400">Where we are going to matters little; we shall soon see. </span>
      <span id="f1401">Since we are being borne along in space we shall end by falling into some centre of attraction or other.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1402">Michel Ardan&#39;s indifference did not content Barbicane. </span>
      <span id="f1403">Not that he was uneasy about the future, but he wanted to know at any cost _why_ his projectile had deviated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1404">But the projectile continued its course sideways to the moon, and with it the mass of things thrown out. </span>
      <span id="f1405">Barbicane could even prove, by the elevations which served as landmarks upon the moon, which was only 2000 leagues distant, that its speed was becoming uniform—fresh proof that there was no fall. </span>
      <span id="f1406">Its impulsive force still prevailed over the lunar attraction, but the projectile&#39;s course was certainly bringing it nearer to the moon, and they might hope that at a nearer point the weight, predominating, would cause a decided fall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1407">The three friends, having nothing better to do, continued their observations; but they could not yet determine the topographical position of the satellite; every relief was levelled under the reflection of the solar rays.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1408">They watched thus through the side windows until eight o&#39;clock at night. </span>
      <span id="f1409">The moon had then grown so large in their eyes that it filled half of the firmament. </span>
      <span id="f1410">The sun on one side, and the orb of night on the other, flooded the projectile with light.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1411">At that moment Barbicane thought he could estimate the distance which separated them from their aim at no more than 700 leagues. </span>
      <span id="f1412">The speed of the projectile seemed to him to be more than 200 yards, or about 170 leagues a second. </span>
      <span id="f1413">Under the centripetal force, the base of the projectile tended towards the moon; but the centrifugal still prevailed; and it was probable that its rectilineal course would be changed to a curve of some sort, the nature of which they could not at present determine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1414">Barbicane was still seeking the solution of his insoluble problem. </span>
      <span id="f1415">Hours passed without any result. </span>
      <span id="f1416">The projectile was evidently _nearing_ the moon, but it was also evident that it would never _reach_ her. </span>
      <span id="f1417">As to the nearest distance at which it would pass her, that must be the result of the two forces, attraction and repulsion, affecting its motion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1418">&#34;I ask but one thing,&#34; said Michel; &#34;that we may pass near enough to penetrate her secrets.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1419">&#34;Cursed be the thing that has caused our projectile to deviate from its course,&#34; cried Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1420">And, as if a light had suddenly broken in upon his mind, Barbicane answered, &#34;Then cursed be the meteor which crossed our path.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1421">&#34;What?&#34; said Michel Ardan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1422">&#34;What do you mean?&#34; exclaimed Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1423">&#34;I mean,&#34; said Barbicane in a decided tone, &#34;I mean that our deviation is owing solely to our meeting with this erring body.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1424">&#34;But it did not even brush us as it passed,&#34; said Michel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1425">&#34;What does that matter? </span>
      <span id="f1426">Its mass, compared to that of our projectile, was enormous, and its attraction was enough to influence our course.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1427">&#34;So little?&#34; cried Nicholl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1428">&#34;Yes, Nicholl; but however little it might be,&#34; replied Barbicane, &#34;in a distance of 84,000 leagues, it wanted no more to make us miss the moon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>